Mythology Unbound: An Online
Textbook for Classical
Mythology

Mythology
Unbound: An
Online
Textbook for
Classical
Mythology
JESSICA MELLENTHIN AND SUSAN O.
SHAPIRO

Mythology Unbound: An Online Textbook for Classical
Mythology by Jessica Mellenthin and Susan O. Shapiro is
licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
Mythology Unbound: An Online Textbook for Classical Mythology
by Jessica Mellenthin and Susan O. Shapiro is licensed under
CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0

Contents

Table of Contents

xi

Map

xiv

PART I. MAIN BODY

Aegis

1

Agamemnon and Iphigenia

3

Aphrodite

7

Apollo

13

Ares

24

The Argonauts

30

Artemis

41

Athena

48

Caduceus

60

Centaurs

61

Chthonian Deities

62

The Delphic Oracle

63

Demeter

72

Dionysus or Bacchus

80

Hades

93

Hephaestus

97

Hera

100

Heracles

105

Hermes

115

Hestia

126

The Iliad – An Introduction

127

Jason

141

Miasma

146

The Minotaur

148

The Odyssey – An Introduction

150

The Oresteia – An Introduction

160

Origins

165

Orpheus

176

Persephone

180

Perseus

185

Poseidon

196

Prometheus

205

Sphinx

208

Story Pattern of the Greek Hero

214

Theseus

217

The Three Types of Myths:
Aetiological, Historical, and
Psychological

230

The Twelve Labors of Heracles

233

What is a Myth?

248

Why Are There So Many Versions of
Greek Myths?

249

Xenia

251

Zeus

252

Image Attributions

265

Table of Contents

• Map
• Aegis
• Agamemnon and Iphigenia
• Aphrodite
• Apollo
• Ares
• The Argonauts
• Artemis
• Athena
• Caduceus
• Centaurs
• Chthonian Deities
• The Delphic Oracle
• Demeter
• Dionysus or Bacchus
• Hades
• Hephaestus
xi

xii

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

• Hera
• Heracles
• Hermes
• Hestia
• The Iliad – An Introduction
• Jason
• Miasma
• The Minotaur
• The Odyssey – An Introduction
• The Oresteia – An Introduction
• Origins
• Orpheus
• Persephone
• Perseus
• Poseidon
• Prometheus
• Sphinx
• Story Pattern of the Greek Hero
• Theseus
• The Three Types of Myths: Aetiological,
Historical, and Psychological
• The Twelve Labors of Heracles
• What is a Myth?
• Why Are There So Many Versions of Greek

xiii

Myths?
• Xenia
• Zeus
• Image Attributions

Map

xiv

MAP

xv

Aegis

The aegis was a goat skin (the name comes from the
word for goat, αἴξ/aix) that was fringed with snakes
and often had the head of Medusa fixed to it.
According to the Iliad (15.307-328), Hephaestus made it
for Zeus and it had magical powers; when a god held it
over an army on the battlefield and shook it, it would
induce panic in the opposing army and cause it to flee.
Although Zeus was the owner of the aegis (and Zeus is
sometimes called “aegis-bearing Zeus”), he would
frequently allow other gods to use it. In the Iliad
passage cited above, Apollo uses the aegis to make the
Greek army run away in panic. But Athena uses it most
of the time (Athena is arguably Zeus’ favorite child),
and Athena is usually depicted wearing it like a cloak,
with Medusa’s head attached to the front and snakes
writhing along the edges. The word “aegis” is used in
English today. Can you explain what it means and how
its current usage is connected to its mythological
origin?

1

2

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Athena wearing the aegis on a lekythos found in the
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City

Agamemnon and Iphigenia

Agamemnon was the King of Mycenae [see Argos on
map] and brother to Menelaus, the King of Sparta
[map]. (Together the brothers are called the Atreidae,
meaning “the sons of Atreus”.) When Menelaus’ wife,
Helen, was abducted by the Trojan Prince, Paris, the
Atreidae sought out their Greek allies to sail to Troy
and bring Helen back; they also planned to punish the
Trojans for stealing Helen of Sparta and violating xenia
[see Xenia]. All the Greek allies were planning to meet
at Aulis. The process of gathering their forces took a
few years because the kingdoms were spread out and
unconnected. Finally, the greatest Greek warriors
gathered at Aulis and were ready to cross the sea to
attack Troy [see Ilium/Troia on map]. However, the
wind kept blowing against them, preventing them from
sailing out towards Troy. This kept up for weeks, long
enough for the troops to get restless and consider
going home. The seer Calchas was among the group,
and he told Agamemnon that he had angered the
goddess Artemis and that the wind would not allow
them to make their voyage until Agamemnon
sacrificed his daughter, Iphigenia, to the goddess.
Sources differ on why exactly Artemis was so angry
3

4

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

with Agamemnon. Some say he boasted that he could
hunt better than the goddess, while others say that he
had not done anything; she just was angry at him.

The Sacrifice of Iphigeneia by François Perrier (1632–1633) in the
Musée des Beaux-Arts in Dijon, France

AGAMEMNON AND IPHIGENIA

5

With the campaign in trouble and the Atreidae’s
reputations at stake, Agamemnon chose to sacrifice his
daughter. He sent Odysseus and Diomedes to his wife,
Clytemnestra (who happened to be Helen’s sister), to
tell her that he had arranged a marriage between their
daughter, Iphigenia, and the hero Achilles, and that
Achilles wished to marry her before he went off to
fight. Agamemnon told this lie because he suspected
that if he told his wife the real reason why he wanted
Iphigenia to come to Aulis, Clytemnestra would not go
along with the plan. But Clytemnestra suspected
nothing; she prepared her daughter for marriage and
sent her off to Aulis. Once there, Agamemnon
sacrificed his own daughter (though some sources
contend that Artemis replaced her with a deer at the
last second and whisked the girl off to live as her
priestess among the Taurians). This action earned
Agamemnon the undying hatred of his wife.

6

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

A fresco of the sacrifice of Iphigenia from Pompeii in the
National Archaeological Museum in Naples

Aphrodite

Roman name: Venus
Epithets: Cypris (Lady of Cyprus), Cythereia (Lady of
Cythera, an island off the southern coast of the
Peloponnese), Paphian (Lady of Paphos, a town on
Crete), Urania (Daughter of Uranus), Smile-Loving
Goddess, Goddess of Smiles and Deceit
Symbols: doves
Functions: goddess of erotic love and beauty

7

8

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Birth of Venus in the Casa della Venere in Conchiglia in
Pompeii

TWO STORIES ON THE BIRTH OF APHRODITE
Aphrodite has two origins. Hesiod says that Aphrodite
came from the frothy mix of sea foam and Uranus’
genitals when Cronus dismembered his father [see
Origins]. She washed ashore either at the city of Paphos
on Cyprus (accounting for her epithets Cypris and
Paphian) or on the island Cythera (thus the epithet
Cythereia). Paphos was also the site of Aphrodite’s main
temple on Cyprus. Homer calls Aphrodite the daughter
of Zeus and Dione, who was either a Titan or one of
the daughters of Oceanus. The name Dione is also the
feminine form of Zeus’ name.

APHRODITE

9

Aphrodite rising from the sea with the help of her attendants on
the Ludovisi Throne in the Palazzo Altemps in Rome

APHRODITE’S UNHAPPY MARRIAGE
Aphrodite was married to the blacksmith god,
Hephaestus, but the two never had any children. This
is not to say Aphrodite never had children, in fact, she
had several children from her long-standing affair with
the war god, Ares. Together they had Harmonia (who
was married to the Theban King, Cadmus), Eros (known
as Cupid in Latin), Phobus (Panic), and Deimus (Fear).
Hephaestus was not happy when he learned of this
affair and trapped the lovers in a net [see Hephaestus].
APHRODITE AND ADONIS
Aphrodite also had notable mortal lovers, including
Adonis and Anchises. Adonis was a handsome young
man and Aphrodite fell deeply in love with him.

10

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Persephone was also in love with Adonis, so they went
to Zeus to decide who would have the youth’s love [see
Persephone]. Zeus split Adonis’ time into three parts.
He gave one part to each goddess and one to Adonis
himself to decide where to spend it. Adonis chose to
spend his portion of the year with Aphrodite. The deal
did not last long though, because Adonis was quite fond
of hunting. On a boar hunt, he was gored by the animal
and died. Aphrodite was distraught, and she induced an
anemone to grow from Adonis’ blood.
APHRODITE AND ANCHISES
Anchises was a young Trojan nobleman who tended
to herds on Mount Ida. Zeus was angry at Aphrodite
for making the gods, especially himself, fall in love with
mortals and make fools of themselves pursuing them,
so he caused Aphrodite to fall madly in love with
Anchises. After she consummated her love for
Anchises, Aphrodite made him promise never to tell
anyone they slept together, on pain of a thunderbolt
from Zeus. (This story is told in the Homeric Hymn to
Aphrodite.) But apparently, Anchises could not keep his
promise. The next time we see Anchises, in the Aeneid,
he is lame from having been struck by Zeus’
thunderbolt. Anchises clearly did not die from this
punishment, but he seems to have been crippled for
the rest of his life. The product of their union was
Aeneas, whom Aphrodite saved from death multiple
times during the Trojan War.

APHRODITE

11

APHRODITE’S ANGER
Like other gods, Aphrodite would punish anyone,
mortal or god, for slights against her. Theseus’ son
Hippolytus became a devotee of the virgin goddess,
Artemis, and thus shunned the pleasures of the flesh.
This angered Aphrodite, who felt that Hippolytus did
not worship her sufficiently. To get back at Hippolytus,
she caused his death by making his step-mother,
Phaedra, fall in love with him [see Theseus]. She also
punished Eos (the goddess of the dawn) for having an
affair with Ares by making her fall in love with mortal
after mortal.
In a story not seen until the Roman period, Venus
hounded the beautiful girl, Psyche, just for being
beautiful. Psyche (whose name means “soul” in Greek)
was so beautiful that the people around her
worshipped her instead of Venus. Psyche did not ask
for this worship, but Venus wanted to punish her
anyway. Venus sent her son Cupid to shoot Psyche with
his arrows and make her fall in love with some hideous
beast. This didn’t go according to plan, though, and
Cupid fell in love with Psyche himself. Cupid hid Psyche
in his palace, not telling her who he was, until she
learned his identity through a trick. In his anger at being
tricked, Cupid threw her out of his house. Psyche
wandered around Greece until she came to a temple
of Venus and submitted herself to Venus’ wrath. Venus
gave her several impossible tasks, like sorting a large
pile of grain in one night or bringing back a jar of water
from the Styx. Venus gave her these tasks hoping she
would fail, but the world helped Psyche along the way.

12

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Some ants helped her sort the grain, and an eagle took
the jar and filled it with water from the Styx for her.
After Psyche had successfully completed these and
other impossible tasks, Cupid forgave her for her
deceit. He then brought her to Jupiter, who put an end
to the enmity between Psyche and Venus and allowed
Cupid and Psyche to marry. This story is told in The
Golden Ass by Apuleius.
THE ORIGIN OF APHRODITE
Aphrodite originally began as a fertility goddess and
had close connections with other Near Eastern fertility
goddesses such as Astarte, Cybele, and Ishtar. At one
point, these may all have been the same goddess.
Aphrodite’s main centers of worship were on Cyprus,
an island that served as a crossroads between Greece
and the Near East, and in Near Eastern sites. Her
eastern origins may explain why she favored the
Trojans during the Trojan War.

Apollo

Roman name: Apollo
Epithets: Pythian (for killing the Python), Lycian
(unknown, may be connected to Lycia), Far-Shooter (for
his archery skills), Delian (for his birth myth), Phoebus
(Shining One), Delphinius (God of the Dolphins)
Symbols: lyre; bow and arrow; laurel, myrtle, or bay
tree; crow or raven; omphalos; dolphin; tripod
Functions: god of youth, music, prophecy, archery,
and medicine (both disease and healing). The Romans
conflated him with the Greek god of the sun, Helius.

13

14

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Apollo Belvedere in the Vatican Museum

APOLLO

15

THE BIRTH OF APOLLO
Apollo was one of the two children born to Zeus and
the goddess, Leto. When Leto was pregnant with Apollo
and Artemis, she was looking for a place to give birth,
but no place was willing to allow her to give birth on its
territory. There was a rumor that Apollo was going to be
a wild and terrible divinity, and no place wanted to take
the risk that Apollo might harm his birthplace after he
was born. But Leto finally convinced the small island of
Delos to allow her to give birth there by promising that
Apollo would have a great temple there.
But even though Leto wanted to give birth on Delos,
at first she wasn’t able to do so. This was because Hera,
who was jealous of Zeus’ affair with Leto, kept Eileithyia,
the goddess of childbirth, away from the island.
Because no birth could take place unless Eileithyia was
present, this was one way that Hera could at least
temporarily prevent the children of her rivals from
being born. Hera would later play a similar trick with
Heracles [see Heracles]. In the case of Apollo and
Artemis, Iris (who was a rainbow, and was one of the
gods’ messengers) was dispatched to bring Eileithyia,
and according to the Homeric Hymn to Apollo, as soon as
she stepped onto the island, Apollo and Artemis were
born.
APOLLO AND ARTEMIS
Apollo and his sister often avenged their mother for the
wrongs done to her. The twins killed the giant Tityus
because he had attempted to rape Leto. The twins also

16

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

took vengeance on Niobe, who had seven sons and
seven daughters. Niobe boasted that she had born
more and greater children than Leto. Angered at
Niobe’s hubris (arrogance, excessive pride, and the
desire to challenge the gods), Apollo and Artemis shot
Niobe’s children with arrows until they were all dead.
Niobe wept uncontrollably until she turned into a stone
which still spouts tears.
Both Apollo and his sister were excellent archers, and
the bow and arrow were important symbols for both of
them. Plagues and unexplained deaths were attributed
to Apollo or Artemis shooting the victims with arrows
(the beginning of the Iliad is a good example of this).
The lyre was most associated with Apollo as the god of
music, however, it was created by the god Hermes [see
Hermes].
APOLLO’S UNHAPPY LOVE AFFAIRS
Apollo was unlucky in a number of his love affairs; in
fact, he seems never to have been happy in love. He
fell in love with Cassandra, the daughter of Priam, king
of Troy, and in order to win her consent, he offered
her the gift of prophesy. But after she was given the
gift, Cassandra changed her mind and refused his
advances. Because a god cannot take back a gift once
it has been given, Apollo could not prevent Cassandra
from correctly predicting the future, so he cursed her
to never be believed even though her predictions were
always correct. Another time, Apollo pursued the
nymph, Daphne, but she fled from him, calling upon the
gods to save her. The gods transformed Daphne into a

APOLLO

17

laurel tree and Apollo, being disheartened, vowed that
the laurel would be his special plant forever. Another
notable love of Apollo was Hyacinth, a Spartan boy.
Hyacinth was killed accidentally by a discus that Apollo
threw toward him in a game. From the blood of the boy,
the god made a flower grow and named it hyacinth,
after the boy. The flower is red and has white markings
that resemble the letters AI, which sound like the Greek
mourning cry. (How would you categorize this myth?)

18

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

APOLLO

19

Apollo and Daphne by Bernini in the Galleria Borghese in Rome

20

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

APOLLO

21

Close up of Daphne’s face

Apollo bedded the mortal Coronis, but she then
decided to take a mortal lover. Apollo was informed
of her betrayal by a crow, which he changed from its
previous white color to black. (This explains why all
crows are now black.) Coronis was pregnant with
Apollo’s child when she decided to sleep with the
mortal, so Apollo killed them both, but he rescued the
child from her womb. The child, Asclepius, was raised
by the good centaur Chiron [see Centaurs], from whom
he learned how to heal. Asclepius became so good at
healing that he started to bring the dead back to life.
This angered Zeus, so he killed Asclepius with his
thunderbolt. Apollo was furious, so he killed the
Cyclopes who made the thunderbolts as retaliation.
Zeus wanted to imprison Apollo in Tartarus as
punishment, but Leto intervened on her son’s behalf
and convinced Zeus to force Apollo to live as a mortal
for a year. Asclepius was deified and became a god of
medicine and healing. The caduceus, Asclepius’ special
staff, became a symbol of healing.

22

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

A kylix depicting Apollo with his symbols in the Delphi Museum

APOLLO IN THE TROJAN WAR
In the Trojan War, Apollo was on the side of the Trojans.
The reason for this is unclear, although his epithet,
Lycian, may mean “from Lycia” (in what is now southern
Turkey).
THE ORIGIN OF APOLLO
It is unclear where the god Apollo came from. He was
not originally a god of the Mycenaeans (the Greek-

APOLLO

23

speaking peoples who migrated into the Greek
peninsula sometime around 1900 BC), nor was he one
of the pre-Hellenic gods of the indigenous people. His
mother and sister were both Asiatic goddesses, but
there is no clear connection between them in origin.
Again, his epithet, Lycian, may point to a Near Eastern
connection.

Ares

Roman name: Mars
Function: god of war

24

ARES

25

26

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Ludovisi Ares with Eros in the Palazzo Altemps in Rome

Ares was the son of Zeus and Hera, but because of his
bloodthirstiness, not many of the gods cared much for
him, except Aphrodite. Ares and Aphrodite had a longstanding affair [see Aphrodite]. Ares had four children
with her as well as many children with Thracian women
[map]. He was the father of several of the Argonauts
and of the Amazon Queen, Penthesileia.
Ares was worshipped mostly in areas outside of
Greece and thus had barbaric connotations (in Greek,
the word “barbaros” [βάρβαρος] means “foreign”).
Thrace and Scythia were centers for his worship, and
in myth he was largely associated with the Amazons
and Colchians [map]. The belt Heracles stole from the
Amazon Queen Hippolyte had been given to her by
Ares [see 12 Labors of Heracles]. The grove in which the
Golden Fleece rested was sacred to Ares.
Despite his bloodthirstiness, Ares was often beaten
by others. Athena wounded him gravely while fighting
at Troy. Heracles managed to take him down four times
while fighting at Pylus. The giants Otus and Ephialtes
trapped him in a pot and he was stuck there for over a
year until Hermes rescued him.
The Greeks were not fond of Ares because he was so
bloodthirsty. In fact, Zeus tells Ares, “To me, you are the
most hateful of the gods who hold Olympus, because
quarreling is always dear to you, and war and battles”
(Iliad 5.890-91). Zeus’ outburst is particularly striking
because Ares was his own son. On the other hand, Mars
was always a favorite god of the Romans. Mars was the
protector of Rome, and he was their patron god similar

ARES

27

to the way Athena was for the Athenians. Mars was also
especially important to the Romans because he was not
only their war god but also an agricultural god.

28

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

ARES

29

Mars Resting by Diego Velázquez (1640) in the Prado Museum in
Madrid

The Argonauts

THE ARGO
The hero Jason was asked by his uncle, Pelias, to bring
him the Golden Fleece. [For more on the hero’s life
and how Pelias came to give him this command, see
Jason]. The Golden Fleece was a ram’s fleece of pure
gold; it was the prized possession of Aeëtes, the King
of Colchis, which was located on the far-away shores
of the Black Sea [map]. Jason organized an expedition
of heroes from all over Greece to sail with him on this
adventure. The roster of heroes varies from source to
source, but there are a few who appear on almost every
list: Heracles; Orpheus; Castor and Polydeuces (also
known as Pollux), the Dioscuri (meaning sons of Zeus);
Telamon, father of the Greater Ajax; Peleus, father of
Achilles; and Argus, the builder and eponym of the
Argo, the ship on which the Argonauts sailed. Argus had
built the ship (with the help of Athena) with one beam
from the sacred oak of Dodona. This beam could speak,
and at some points it gave advice to the crew.

30

THE ARGONAUTS

31

THE LEMNIAN WOMEN
The expedition first came to Lemnos, an island
inhabited only by women, because all the men had
been killed. Sometime before this, the women on the
island had neglected the cult of the goddess Aphrodite.
Aphrodite, becoming angry, of course, had caused the
women to give off a terrible odor. The women’s
husbands naturally began to avoid their wives, and
eventually they sailed to Thrace and brought back
concubines to sleep with instead of their wives. The
women were so angry that they killed all the men and
the Thracian women as well. (Only one man survived;
the princess, Hypsipyle, hid her aged father in a chest
and put him out to sea; he drifted ashore on the island
of Oenoë.) Because of this terrible deed, the Lemnian
women lived in constant fear that the Thracians would
come and attack them in retaliation. When the
Argonauts landed on Lemnos, the Lemnian women
believed that the Thracians had come to kill them and
got ready for battle. Jason sent one of his crew, a son
of Hermes, as a messenger to ask the women if the
Argonauts could camp out on their shore. His words
convinced the women they were not in immediate
danger, so they convened a council in which they
decided that having a group of strong and handsome
heroes around would not be a bad idea. The women
sent a messenger to bring the heroes into the city.
Most of the Argonauts were thrilled to spend the
night in the city (apparently the women no longer
smelled bad), but Heracles and a few others stayed with
the ship. Queen Hypsipyle became quite enamored

32

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

with Jason and offered to allow the Argonauts to come
and stay. If Jason had any skill, it was charming women.
He thanked Hypsipyle graciously but told her that he
and his men had to continue on with their journey.
Most authors say that the Argonauts spent only a few
days on Lemnos, but this was long enough for a new
generation of Lemnians to result.
THE DOLIONES
After leaving Lemnos, the Argonauts sailed for the
Hellespont [see Hellespontus on map]. They landed on
an island in the Sea of Marmara inhabited by a people
called the Doliones. Their king offered to give them
shelter and to restock their supplies because an oracle
had told him to offer aid to such travelers. Only a few
men were left to guard the ship, so when a group of
giants came upon the guards, the ship would have been
easily destroyed had the mighty Heracles not been one
of the guards. Heracles singlehandedly shot several of
the giants and chased the others away. The King of
the Doliones showed Jason the route for the next leg
of their journey and the Argo soon headed off, but
contrary winds pushed the ship back into the harbor.
By now it was dark, however, and no one could see
very well. When the Argonauts disembarked, they did
not realize where they were; the Doliones believed a
group of raiders had come to attack them, and so a
battle ensued. Eventually the Doliones retreated,
having lost a large number of their men. The next
morning, the Argonauts realized their mistake when
they found the body of the king. The Argonauts and the

THE ARGONAUTS

33

Doliones together celebrated a magnificent funeral for
all the deceased. A few days later, the Argonauts moved
on.
HERACLES AND HYLAS
The next day they came to the coast of Mysia [map].
Here, Heracles broke his oar, so the group put ashore
to make a new one. Heracles went into the woods to
cut down the wood for a new oar while his lover, Hylas,
went to a stream to get some water. At the stream,
Hylas’ striking beauty caused the nymph of the stream
to abduct him by grabbing him and taking him down
to her palace under the water. Heracles was
understandably upset by Hylas’ disappearance and
spent the entire night searching for him. He was still
out searching the next day when the rest of the crew
were getting ready to leave, and in their hurry they
left Heracles behind. Heracles managed to find his way
home, where he continued his labors.
PHINEUS AND THE HARPIES
Next, the Argonauts headed for the Bosphorus [map]
and landed in Salmydessus, the capital of Thynia. Here
they met the king, a man named Phineus, who was
blind and was being hounded by the Harpies. The
Harpies were women with the wings, beaks, and talons
of birds. Their name comes from the Greek verb
harpazein (ἁρπάζειν) meaning “to snatch,” and that’s
what they did. Whenever Phineus tried to eat anything
the Harpies would swoop down and steal some of the

34

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

food; they left droppings on the rest, so as to make
it inedible. So, Phineus was slowly starving to death.
Phineus was very weak by the time the Argonauts
found him. He asked them for their help, and they of
course obliged. Two of the Argonauts, Zetes and Calaïs,
were the sons of Boreas, the North Wind, and because
of this, they had wings on their backs. A wonderful feast
was prepared, and when the Harpies came to snatch
it, Zetes and Calaïs took flight and chased the Harpies
away. The brothers would have killed the Harpies with
their bows and arrows, but Iris (who was the rainbow
and also the messenger of Zeus) told them that Zeus
wanted them to spare the Harpies’ lives as long as the
Harpies promised never to bother Phineus again. When
Zetes and Calaïs returned to Salmydessus, everyone
enjoyed the feast. In return for their help, Phineus gave
them the information they needed to get past the
Symplegades (otherwise known as the Clashing Rocks).

THE ARGONAUTS

35

The Harpies stealing Phineus’ food on a krater in the
Archaeological Museum in Ferrara, Italy

THE CLASHING ROCKS
The expedition now headed for the Clashing Rocks,
located at the entrance to the Bosphorus [map]. These
were floating islands that would crash together with
tremendous speed at unpredictable intervals. When
they got there, the Argonauts did as Phineus had
instructed and sent a dove to fly between the rocks.
They watched to see what would happen to the bird,
since Phineus had told them that if the bird survived,
they had a chance of making it through. If the bird
did not, it was useless and they would most definitely
perish if they tried. The dove successfully made it
through the rocks, though it lost its tail feathers. As the
rocks separated, the sailors prepared to row as hard as
they possibly could because their lives depended on it.

36

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The boat rushed forward at top speed, but the waves
created by the moving rocks nearly capsized the Argo.
The crew would have perished had Athena not stepped
in and held the rocks apart while pushing the Argo
through. But after the Argo escaped, the rocks stayed
in place; the gods had decided long ago that once a
ship had passed through them, they would never crash
together again.
THE SONS OF PHRIXUS
The rest of the journey to Colchis was relatively easy for
the Argonauts. Zeus steered the group away from the
island of the Amazons, Themiscyra, where the Amazons
were already prepared for a fight. After a little more
sailing, the ship came to a desert island sacred to Ares
which Phineus had advised them to visit because they
would find something vital to their mission while there.
The island was filled with birds with feathers so sharp
they could cut through flesh. To get onto the island,
the Argonauts held their shields over their heads to
make cover. They then clashed their weapons together
to scare the birds away. Now able to move around, the
crew found the sons of Phrixus stranded on the island.
(Phrixus was the youth who had been carried to Colchis
by the golden ram. He had stayed in Colchis and had
married King Aeëtes’ daughter.) The boys were able to
show the group the rest of the way to Colchis.
JASON’S TASKS
When the crew finally arrived in Colchis, they had no

THE ARGONAUTS

37

idea how they were going to get the golden fleece,
but Hera and Athena asked Aphrodite for her help.
Aphrodite sent her son, Eros (also known as Cupid),
to shoot Medea, the daughter of King Aeëtes, with his
arrows so she would fall in love with Jason (Apollonius
Rhodius, Argonautica). The moment Medea saw Jason
she instantly fell in love with him. She brought them
into the house and her father, on account of xenia
[see Xenia], had to allow the strangers to join them for
dinner.
At the dinner banquet, Argus (one of Phrixus’ sons)
explained who they were and that they had come for
the Golden Fleece. Unexpectedly, Aeëtes told the
Argonauts that he would certainly give them the Fleece;
he said he would only ask Jason to perform a few tasks
first. All Jason had to do was yoke a pair of firebreathing bulls to a plow, sow a field with dragon’s
teeth, and then, when fully-armed warriors sprang up
from the teeth, he would have to kill all of the warriors.
Jason had no idea how he was going to perform these
tasks, but he reluctantly agreed. Later that night,
Medea, who was a priestess of Hecate and a very skilled
witch, paid a visit to Jason. Medea made Jason promise
that he would take her back to Iolcus with him if she
helped him complete these impossible tasks. Jason
eagerly agreed, and Medea gave him a potion and told
him what to do.
The night before he had to complete his tasks, Jason
sacrificed to Hecate in the manner Medea had
instructed him. Then early the next morning he rubbed
the potion into his skin and went to find the firebreathing bulls. Jason was able to yoke the bulls to

38

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

the plow because the potion protected him from their
fire. He plowed the field with the bulls and sowed the
dragon’s teeth. From the soil came hundreds of fierce
warriors, but Jason had been told by Medea what he
needed to do. Jason threw a rock into the middle of the
warriors, and they, thinking their fellows were attacking
them, began to attack one another. Jason waited while
they fought one another until only one was left, and
then he killed the remaining warrior.
STEALING THE GOLDEN FLEECE
Aeëtes, angry that Jason had been able to complete
these impossible tasks, refused to hand over the Fleece,
and the Greeks retreated to their camp. That night,
Medea snuck out to the Greek camp and met with
Jason. She told him that if he agreed to marry her, she
would help him steal the Fleece. Jason agreed and they
went to the grove which housed the Golden Fleece. A
dragon stood guard over the grove, but Medea put it
to sleep with drugs. Jason killed the dragon and stole
the Fleece, and then he and Medea rushed back to the
Greek camp, jumped into the ship, and sailed toward
Greece, taking Medea’s younger brother, Apsyrtus, with
them. Aeëtes soon learned what had happened and
sailed after them with his entire fleet.
THE MURDER OF APSYRTUS
As Aeëtes and his fleet began to gain on the Argo,
Medea had run out of ideas. But she was desperately
in love with Jason, so she did the only thing she could

THE ARGONAUTS

39

think of. Medea killed her younger brother, Apsyrtus,
and chopped him into pieces. Then she threw the
pieces over the side of the ship, one by one. Aeëtes,
when he saw the pieces of his son floating by, stopped
to pick up each of the limbs and eventually the head.
He forgot all about pursuing the Argo, but he returned
to Colchis to give his dead child a decent burial. This
allowed the Argonauts to escape the clutches of Aeëtes,
but it meant that Medea began her life with Jason by
murdering her own brother.
CIRCE
Zeus was angry at the crew for the murder of Apsyrtus,
so Hera blew them off their course, sending them to the
waters around Italy to protect them from Zeus’ wrath.
The beam of the ship with the ability to speak told the
crew that they could not return home until they had
been purified of Apsyrtus’ murder by Aeëtes’ sister, the
witch Circe, who lived on the island called Aeaea. They
found Circe and she performed the proper sacrifices
and purification rituals. After this was done she asked
who they were. Medea explained the story (minus the
death of Apsyrtus) to her, and Circe was appalled to
learn that her niece had stolen the Golden Fleece. She
ordered the Argonauts to leave her island.
THE SIRENS
Now that they had been purified of the murder, Hera
helped the crew of the Argo make their journey to
Iolcus. They passed the Sirens, who are described as

40

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

birds with the heads of women and the ability to sing so
wonderfully that any sailor who heard their song would
jump out of the boat and swim toward their island
where they would die of starvation. The Argonauts had
Orpheus amongst their crew, and he played a song
that rivaled the song of the Sirens and allowed the
Argo to pass unharmed. The Argo also passed by Scylla
(a monster with six dogs for legs) and Charybdis (a
whirlpool that would suck up water and then
regurgitate it) and would have surely perished had
Thetis (a sea nymph) and her sisters not guided the
Argo through the waters. Thetis would later become the
bride of one of the Argonauts, Peleus.
RETURN TO IOLCUS
After much wandering, the Argo finally made it back to
Iolcus, where Jason and Medea were married. For the
rest of the story about Jason and Medea, see Jason.

Artemis

Roman name: Diana
Epithets: Potnia Therōn (Mistress of Wild Beasts)
Symbols: bow and arrow, quiver, hunting dogs, deer
and other animals, fawn skin
Functions: goddess of hunting, wild animals
(especially baby animals), and childbirth. The Romans
conflated Diana with the Greek goddess of the moon,
Selene (just as they identified Apollo with Helius, the
Greek god of the sun).
BIRTH OF ARTEMIS
Artemis was the twin sister to Apollo and was the
daughter of Zeus and Leto [see Apollo]. Both Apollo and
Artemis took revenge against anyone who attempted to
harm their mother. Apollo and Artemis slew the giant
Tityus and killed the children of the mortal woman
Niobe [see Apollo].

41

42

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Apollo and Diana Punishing Niobe by Killing her Children by
Abraham Bloemaert (1591) found in the National Gallery of
Denmark in Copenhagen

ARTEMIS’ CRUELTY: CALLISTO, ACTAEON,
AGAMEMNON, ORION
Artemis, like many other deities, was known for her
cruel behavior, but Artemis seems to have been one of
the cruelest and most vengeful of the deities. In some
cases, she would become angry and punish human
beings even if (at least in their own minds) they had
done nothing wrong. Artemis was a virgin goddess, and
she was accompanied by nymphs, who also were
expected to remain virgins. If any of these nymphs
slipped up and lost their virginity, Artemis treated them

ARTEMIS

43

very harshly. One such attendant was Callisto, whom
Zeus raped. Afterwards, Artemis changed Callisto into
a bear for breaking her vow of chastity. In another
example, the hunter Acteon was out hunting and
accidentally stumbled upon the goddess bathing. She
turned Acteon into a deer and allowed him to be torn
apart by his own hunting dogs. When Agamemnon, the
Mycenaean king, angered her, Artemis demanded that
he sacrifice his daughter Iphigenia to her before he was
able to sail for Troy [see Agamemnon and Iphigneia].
Despite the fact that Agamemnon did as she
commanded, Artemis’ sympathies in the Trojan War
were always with the Trojans. In some versions of the
myth of Orion, his death, too, was caused by Artemis’
anger. He either challenged her, tried to rape her or
one of her attendants, or he had an affair with Eos, the
goddess of dawn; in any case Artemis shot him. But
after his death he was placed in the sky to become the
constellation, Orion.

44

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Death of Actaeon by Titian (between 1559 and 1575) in the
National Gallery in London

ARTEMIS

45

Diana and Actaeon by Titian (between 1556 and 1559) in the
Scottish National Gallery in Edinburgh

ARTEMIS’ ORIGINS
Artemis seems to have originally been a goddess of
wild beasts from the Near East. She was similar to the
goddess Potnia Therōn (Lady of Wild Animals), with
whom she later became identified. She also has strong
connections to the Gorgon, Medusa. Many of the
important figures among her retinue of nymphs are
believed to be local goddesses who were similar in
function to Artemis.

46

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Potnia Theron with a gorgon’s head on a plate in the British
Museum

ARTEMIS

A plate depicting Potnia Theron with a woman’s head in the
Mykonos Museum

47

Athena

Roman name: Minerva
Epithets: Pallas (maiden), Tritogeneia (unknown
meaning), Promachus (one who fights for her city),
Ergane (artisan or worker), Owl-Eyed, Polias (protector
of the city), Parthenios (virgin), Gray-Eyed
Symbols: owl, Nike, olive tree, aegis, snake
Functions: goddess of just wars, wisdom, and crafts;
patroness of Athens; and helper of heroes
THE BIRTH OF ATHENA
Athena was the daughter of Zeus and his first wife
Metis. Gaia told Zeus that Metis would first bear a
daughter then a son who would overthrow his father.
Zeus, like his father and grandfather before him,
wanted to avoid this fate, so when Metis became
pregnant, he swallowed his wife whole [see Zeus]. After
a few months, Zeus developed a splitting headache and
asked Hephaestus (or in some versions, the Titan
Prometheus) to help him relieve the pressure.
Hephaestus took up his axe and split open Zeus’ head,
and out jumped Athena, fully dressed in armor.
48

ATHENA

49

Another tradition has it that Athena was born near a
river called Triton, an etymological aetiological myth
that was created to explain her epithet Tritogeneia.

The birth of Athena on a pyxis in the Louvre

ATHENA AS THE PROTECTOR OF HEROES
Athena was particularly fond of courageous youths and
helped many heroes in their quests. When Perseus was
sent to kill the Gorgon, Medusa, Athena provided the
sword and shiny shield needed to slay the Gorgon
without looking at her. She gave the hero Bellerophon
the golden bridle he needed to ride the winged horse,
Pegasus; by riding on Pegasus’ back, Bellerophon was
able to kill the monster, Chimera. The Argonauts were
saved from the Clashing Rocks by Athena’s help [see
Argonauts]. Odysseus, however, because of his
cunning, was one of Athena’s favorite mortals.

50

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Odysseus’ return home after the Trojan War was only
possible because of Athena’s machinations. Her
intervention also helps him survive the Greater Ajax’s
wrath in Sophocles’ Ajax. Whenever Odysseus is
depicted in a myth, Athena is never far away.

ATHENA

51

The statue of Athena in the Nashville Parthenon is based upon
the ancient statue in the Athens Parthenon made from ivory and
gold.

52

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

ATHENA AND ARACHNE
Athena, like the other gods, was quick to punish mortals
who thought they were equal to the gods. One such
mortal was the weaver, Arachne. Arachne boasted that
her weaving was as good as Athena’s. Athena was angry
and challenged Arachne to a contest of weaving.
Athena wove a tapestry depicting mortals who
challenged the gods and were punished. Arachne
answered with a tapestry depicting the scandalous
behavior of the Olympians. It was obvious that
Arachne’s skill was equal to Athena’s, and Athena was
livid so she beat the girl mercilessly. Arachne chose to
hang herself to end her suffering, but Athena was not
yet done with her and turned Arachne into a spider,
giving the tiny animal its name in Greek (arachne,
ἀράχνη) and its practice of weaving webs.
ATHENA AS THE PROTECTOR OF ATHENS
The city of Athens was named after Athena because she
was the Athenians’ protector and benefactor, but she
had earned that right by winning a competition with
Poseidon for patronage over the city. Differing versions
say that either Zeus (and possibly other gods) or a
committee of Athenian kings judged the contest. Either
way, each divinity was asked to provide a gift for the city
and the judges would decide who had given the better
gift. Poseidon struck a rock with his trident and out
came a spring of saltwater, but Athena grew an olive
tree. The judges decided that the olive was more useful
than the spring and awarded Athena the city. When

ATHENA

53

Athena was not living on Olympus, she often lived in
the Parthenon, the temple to her on the Acropolis in
Athens. Thus, when Orestes came to Athena to judge
whether he should be punished for the murder of his
mother, Clytemnestra, he came to her in Athens.
Athena used this opportunity to establish the
Areopagus council as the official court in Athens [see
Oresteia].

The Parthenon on the Acropolis of Athens

54

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The west pediment of the Nashville Parthenon

ATHENA

55

56

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Athena mourning a fallen Athenian soldier on a grave stele now
located in the Acropolis Museum

ATHENA’S VIRGINITY
Like the other virgin goddesses (Artemis and Hestia),
Athena sometimes had to work to preserve her virginity
against the advances of other immortals. One such
instance was when Hephaestus attempted to rape her.
She managed to break away from him before he could
violate her, but his semen fell to the ground. A child was
born from the mixing of the semen and the earth, and
he was named Erichthonius. Athena took the child and
raised him in her temple, and he eventually became
one of the earliest Kings of Athens.
THE AEGIS
Athena held the unique favor of her father and was
allowed to use his aegis [see Aegis]. More often than
not, it is Athena, not Zeus, who is depicted with the
aegis. Athena is usually shown with the severed head
of Medusa either on her aegis or on her shield. Perseus
gave her Medusa’s head in gratitude for her aid in
helping him kill the Gorgon.

ATHENA

57

A statue of Athena in the Naples Museum

ATHENA AND THE LESSER AJAX
Because of Paris’ decision in the beauty contest
between Athena, Hera, and Aphrodite, Athena sided

58

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

with the Greeks when the Trojan War broke out [see
Intro to Iliad]. This did not stop her from brutally
punishing the Lesser Ajax for an atrocity he committed
during the sack of Troy. (The Lesser Ajax was so called
to distinguish him from the more famous warrior who
was also named Ajax. The more famous Ajax was
known as the Greater Ajax.) As the Greeks were sacking
Troy, raping and pillaging as they went, Cassandra, a
daughter of Priam, sought protection in Athena’s
temple. When a person seeks the protection of a god
or goddess in that deity’s temple, that person becomes
sacred and should not be harmed. But Ajax pulled
Cassandra away from the statue of Athena, which she
was clutching. He then raped Cassandra in Athena’s
temple, enraging the goddess with his sacrilege and
desecration of her temple. She enlisted the help of
Poseidon to destroy him. On his way home, Ajax’s ships
crashed onto rocks, but Ajax survived, shouting to the
heavens, “not even the gods can kill me!” This boast
infuriated Poseidon, who split the rock Ajax was
clutching, causing him to fall into the sea and drown
(Homer, Odyssey, 4.499-511).
THE ORIGIN OF ATHENA
Athena may possibly have originated as a warrior
goddess of the Mycenaeans, an early Greek-speaking
people based in the Peloponnese. She is associated
with snakes, but it is not clear what the significance of
the snake is to Athena.

ATHENA

Statue of Athena from the depiction of the Gigantomachy from
the Old Athena Temple on the Acropolis, now in the Acropolis
Museum

59

Caduceus

The caduceus (kerykeion in Greek) was a herald’s staff
with two snakes wound around it. It was carried by
Hermes to signify his role as messenger and as guide
for souls to the Underworld. Hermes sometimes used
the caduceus as a way to channel his powers, such
as waking or putting mortals to sleep [Homer, Iliad,
24.343-345]. It should be carefully distinguished from
the rod of Asclepius, which had only one snake and was
used by Asclepius in healing.

60

Centaurs

Half-man, half-horse creatures
Centaurs (sometimes called hippocentaurs) were
creatures with the torso and head of a man and the
body of a horse. As befits their part-beast, part-human
status, they had trouble controlling their passions. Also,
they had a strong taste for wine but could not hold
their liquor. At the wedding of the Lapith, Peirithoüs,
they all got very drunk and abducted all the women
present, including the bride. The Lapiths fought back,
along with Peirithoüs’ good friend, Theseus, and most
of the centaurs were killed or banished. There were,
however, a few civilized centaurs, such as Pholus, who
helped Heracles in his battle against the centaurs [see
the 12 Labors of Heracles], and the immortal Chiron,
who served as the teacher and mentor of several
heroes, such as Jason, Asclepius, and Achilles.

61

Chthonian Deities

All Greek deities can be divided into two types: the
Olympians, who were thought of as living on Mount
Olympus (or somewhere in the heavens), and the
Chthonians, who were thought of as living below the
earth. Their name comes from chthōn (χθών), which
is the Greek word for “earth” or “ground.” In order to
sacrifice to one of the Olympian gods, an animal would
be ritually slaughtered and the less edible pieces would
be burned on an altar so the smoke could waft up to
the Olympians and nourish them. In a sacrifice to one
of the Chthonians, on the other hand, a pit would be
dug in the ground and an animal would be slaughtered
(without any burning) in such a way that the blood
would pour into the pit. Libations (such as milk or wine)
could also be poured into the pit to give the gods
sustenance. For a good example of chthonian sacrifice,
see Odyssey Book 10 lines 515-530 (in the Greek) or
Odyssey Book 11 lines 23-37 (in the Greek).

62

The Delphic Oracle

The word “oracle” comes from the Latin word oraculum,
which means both a prophecy made by a god (or priest)
and the place where the prophecy is given. Similarly,
the English word “oracle” has both meanings. So, the
Delphic Oracle refers to the place where the prophecies
were given, but an “oracle” can also refer to a prophecy
that Apollo gave there.
The Delphic Oracle belonged to Apollo, and his
priestess, called the Pythia, gave her oracles from inside
Apollo’s temple.
The Oracle at Delphi [map] seems to have originally
been held by Gaia (Aeschylus, Eumenides 1-8).
According to some accounts, Gaia had a snake or
dragon, named the Python, that guarded her oracle.
When Apollo came to take over the oracle, he first had
to kill the dragon in order to take possession of it.
Apollo’s priestess got her title, the Pythia, from the
Python.

63

64

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Sacred Way at Delphi with the remains of the Athenians’
Treasury

Delphi was (and still is) located in central Greece, on the
side of Mount Parnassus. The temple of Apollo, where
the prophesies were given, was (and still is) situated
in an incredibly beautiful spot about half way up the
mountain. This is one of the most beautiful places on
earth, and the Greeks clearly chose this spot for the
temple with good reason.

THE DELPHIC ORACLE

65

The Temple of Apollo at Delphi

THE CONSULTATION PROCEDURE
There were many other oracles in Greece, but the
Oracle at Delphi was the most famous, and everyone
who could afford to consult the Oracle at Delphi
preferred to do so. Of course, there was a long waiting
period to consult the oracle (sometimes several
months), and there were a number of expensive,
preliminary sacrifices. Most of the people who
consulted the Oracle at Delphi were wealthy individuals
or even heads of state. The long path leading up the
mountain to Apollo’s temple, called the Sacred Way,
was lined with treasure houses. These treasuries were
filled with costly gifts that leaders and cities had given
to Apollo. Some of these treasuries are still standing,
and a very few of those precious gifts can still be seen
in the museum at Delphi.

66

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Albert Tournaire’s recreation of Apollo’s Temple at Delphi and
the Sacred Way leading up to it.

When someone came to ask a question of the Oracle,
he would need to make a preliminary sacrifice of a
goat, and then purify himself in the nearby Castilian
Spring. Then he would approach the adyton of Apollo’s
temple. The adyton is a room inside the temple that
was off limits; no one could go in. It is unclear whether
those who were consulting the oracle were allowed to
go inside the adyton or if they had to remain outside.
The Pythia is usually conceived of as sitting on a tripod
when she gave her prophecies. A tripod (as its name
implies) was a three-footed stand, usually made of
metal. Tripods had a round, metal band around the top,
and they were usually used to hold a cauldron over the
fire for cooking. But in this case, the Pythia would sit on
it, almost like she was sitting on a three-legged stool, to
give her prophecies.

THE DELPHIC ORACLE

67

The Pythia on her tripod giving an oracle on a kylix in the Altes
Museum in Berlin

After the person consulting the Oracle asked his
question, the Pythia would go into a trance; it was
believed that Apollo himself possessed her. She would
speak and a priest (or several priests) who were
standing nearby would take down what she said and
translate her words into a poem written in hexameters.
It is usually assumed that the Pythia’s original words
were coherent, but not very clear. Of course, there is no
way to know for sure what her words were really like,
but perhaps we can get a good idea from Cassandra’s
prophecies in Aeschylus’ play, the Agamemnon. In that

68

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

play, Cassandra gives several prophecies that make
sense to the audience (because we know what is going
to happen), but are so fragmented and confusing that
the other characters in the drama do not understand
them.

The Oracle by Camillo Miola (1880) in the Getty Museum

Once the Pythia’s words were translated into
hexameter poetry, the poem was written down and
given to the person who sought the advice; it was
always the responsibility of the recipient to interpret
the oracle correctly. And the oracles, even in their final
form, were always ambiguous. Frequently (though not
always), the recipients did not interpret them correctly,
and they suffered as a result.

THE DELPHIC ORACLE

69

FAMOUS EXAMPLES OF ORACLES
For example, Aegeus, the king of Athens, asked the
Delphic Oracle how he could have children, and the
Oracle said: “Do not open the foot of the wineskin until
you return home.” [see Theseus]
According to Herodotus, Croesus, the king of Lydia,
asked the oracle if he should go to war with Persia.
Lydia was a large and very prosperous kingdom in what
is now central Turkey, but Cyrus, the king of Persia,
had recently expanded his kingdom so that it bumped
up against Lydia’s borders. Croesus felt threatened by
the Persian expansion, so he wanted to know if he
should attack Persia before Persia attacked him. The
Pythia answered: “If you go to war against Persia, you
will destroy a great empire” (Herodotus 1.53). Croesus
interpreted this to mean that he would destroy Persia,
and so he gathered his forces and attacked. But
Croesus lost the war, and in the end he was forced
to admit that he had destroyed his own great empire
(Herodotus 1.91).
There are many examples of people misinterpreting
oracles (usually because, like Croesus, they interpret it
according to what they want to hear), but there are
a few examples of people who interpret their oracles
correctly, and benefit greatly as a result.

70

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

THE OMPHALOS

The Omphalos, or the navel stone of the earth, in the
Archaeological Museum of Delphi

The Greeks believed that Delphi was located at the

THE DELPHIC ORACLE

71

center of the earth. Near Apollo’s temple was a rock
(about 2-3 feet high) shaped similarly to a beehive and
carved with a floral pattern. This was the omphalos (or
“navel” in Greek), which was considered to be the navel
stone of the earth. In art, Apollo is sometimes shown
using this as his seat, implying that his oracle was in
some sense the epicenter of everything that occurred
on earth. According to Hesiod (Theogony 497-500), this
was originally the stone that Rhea had given to Cronus
to swallow instead of Zeus. Zeus placed it at Delphi
after Cronus had vomited it up (with the other
Olympians) and Zeus had won the battle with the Titans
to gain control over the cosmos (see Origins).

This coin, minted in Sardis, depicts Antiochus Hierax of the
Seleucid Empire. The reverse side depicts Apollo sitting on the
omphalos.

Demeter

Roman name: Ceres
Epithets:
Chthonian
(shared
with
daughter
Persephone; refers to their status as goddesses
associated with the earth, χθών [chthōn] being a Greek
word for earth or land)
Symbols: wheat, grain
Functions: goddess of agriculture and grain
DEMETER AND PERSEPHONE
Demeter was a daughter of Cronus and Rhea, and was
swallowed by her father (along with the rest of Cronus
and Rhea’s children) shortly after her birth [See
Origins]. After Zeus rescued his older siblings from their
father, Demeter had an affair with her brother Zeus,
which resulted in a daughter, Persephone. Hades fell
deeply in love with Persephone, and the following story
about them is told in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter.
Zeus gave his consent for Hades to marry his daughter,
but because he believed that Demeter would not
approve of the match, he told Hades to abduct
Persephone and take her to his realm in the
72

DEMETER

73

Underworld. With the aid of Gaia (Mother Earth, who is
also known as Ge), Hades did just that.
Persephone was out gathering flowers with other
young nymphs and goddesses, and she spotted an
unusual and beautiful narcissus flower, blooming with
the help of Gaia in a particular spot where a trap had
been set by Zeus and Hades. When Persephone went
to pluck the flower, the earth split open and out came
Hades in his chariot. He snatched up the girl and took
her down to his kingdom beneath the earth.
For nine days Demeter searched far and wide for
her daughter, but no one knew what had happened to
Persephone until Demeter happened upon Hecate, a
moon goddess who had heard the abduction but could
not say who had taken Persephone. Together, Hecate
and Demeter continued to search for Persephone until
they came upon Helius, the sun god. Helius, who sees
everything, told the goddesses the information they
wished to know, that Zeus had allowed Persephone
to be taken by Hades. Helius encouraged Demeter to
accept the situation, but instead she grew so angry that
she refused to go back to Olympus [see Olympus Mons
on map].

74

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

DEMETER

75

The Rape of Proserpina by Bernini in the Galleria Borghese in
Rome.

Close up of Bernini’s Rape of Proserpina

DEMETER IN ELEUSIS
Demeter wandered the earth in the likeness of an old
woman named Dos until she came upon the city of
Eleusis. There, at the town well, she met the daughters
of the king, who offered to help her find work as a
nurse. (They did not recognize her as a goddess
because of her disguise.) In fact, they said that their
mother, Metaneira, had just given birth to a baby boy,
and that she would probably welcome Dos into her
home as a nurse.
So Demeter, disguised as Dos, became the nurse for

76

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

the son of the king, Demophon. As a way of thanking
the family for their kindness, Demeter began a process
that would make the boy immortal. She gave him
ambrosia to eat (ambrosia is the food of the gods) and
every night she would place him in the fire to burn
away his mortal parts. One night, Metaneira, the child’s
mother, visited the nursery to see how the old woman
was doing with the boy and found him in the fire. She
screamed in alarm, but this angered Demeter, who
(being a goddess) did not like her actions questioned.
Demeter took Demophon out of the fire (informing
Metaneira that her son would have become immortal)
and then she revealed her divinity to the queen.
Demeter now revealed herself in her true form; she
became young and beautiful, and the house was filled
with a brilliant light. The Eleusinians were distraught
at having angered a goddess, and they wanted to
propitiate her. Demeter instructed the Eleusinians to
build a temple to her, which they did, and she
established her mystery cult in the city. But Demeter
took up her abode in her new temple, and she refused
to return to Olympus.
PERSEPHONE AND THE SEASONS
Still without her daughter, Demeter was so angry at
Zeus that she stayed in her temple in Eleusis and would
not join the other gods on Olympus. Furthermore, she
caused a drought on the earth which lasted for an
entire year, and nearly killed all the mortals. Zeus
realized that if all the mortals died there would be no
one to sacrifice to the gods, so he sent Hermes to

DEMETER

77

persuade Hades to let Persephone return to her
mother. Hades agreed to allow Persephone to return,
but before she left, he tricked her into eating a seed
from a pomegranate. Demeter was ecstatic to reunite
with her daughter, but her spirits fell when she learned
that Persephone had eaten during her time in the
Underworld. There seems to have been a rule that if
someone eats anything in Hades, even something as
small as a pomegranate seed, they can never leave. A
bargain was struck, however, between the god of the
Underworld and the goddess of grain: for two thirds of
the year (spring, summer, and early fall), Persephone
would live with her mother and the plants would grow,
but for the remaining third (late fall and winter), she
would live with her husband below the earth and all
the plants would die (Homeric Hymn to Demeter). This,
of course, is the origin of the seasons (a natural
aetiological myth).
TRIPTOLEMUS
In some versions of the story, after Demeter’s time in
Eleusis, the goddess lent her chariot to a young man
from the city, Triptolemus, so he could spread
knowledge of her gifts, such as the planting and
harvesting of crops—especially wheat. She aided him
when foreign kings did not take kindly to the gifts and
helped him gain the throne of Eleusis. In return, he
began the tradition of the festival to Demeter called the
Thesmophoria. This was a festival celebrated by women
all over Greece, and it was the second most prominent
rite for Demeter after the Eleusinian Mysteries.

78

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Demeter and Kore (Persephone) with Triptolemus on a relief in
the museum at Eleusis

DEMETER

79

THE ORIGIN OF DEMETER
Demeter was probably an indigenous pre-Hellenic
goddess of fertility. Her name means “Mother Da,”
which may or may not mean “Mother Earth”. She is
closely connected with her daughter and is worshipped
in the manner of chthonian deities. [See Chthonian
Deities]

Dionysus or Bacchus

Roman name: Bacchus or Liber Pater (Free Father)
Epithets: Twice-Born, Bromios (Thunderer)
Symbols: the thyrsus (a staff carried by maenads),
the maenads or bacchae or bacchants (his female
followers), vines, satyrs, wine, drinking cup, bull,
panther, snakes
Function: god of wine and drunkenness
THE BIRTH OF DIONYSUS
Dionysus was the son of Zeus and the mortal woman
Semele, who was the daughter of Cadmus, King of
Thebes [see Thebae on map]. When Hera learned that
Semele was pregnant with her husband’s child, she
disguised herself as Semele’s nurse and convinced the
girl she should demand that Zeus show himself to her
as he did to his wife, but first she should make him
swear to meet any demand she might make. Semele
did so and Zeus was forced to comply. Unfortunately, it
seems that Zeus showed himself to Hera in the form of
a lightning bolt. So, Semele was struck by Zeus’ lightning
and died in a blaze. Hermes rescued the unborn baby
80

DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS

81

from Semele’s womb and the child was sewn into Zeus’
thigh, where he stayed for the rest of the pregnancy.
When he was ready to be born, Dionysus was delivered
from his father’s thigh, which explains Dionysus’
epithet, Twice-Born. Hermes spirited the boy away to
live with his aunt, Ino (one of his mother’s sisters). Ino
and her husband, Athamas, raised Dionysus as a girl
to try to hide him from Hera’s wrath, but Hera was
not fooled and caused Ino to go mad. After several
mishaps, Ino jumped into the sea, where she became
the goddess Leucothea.
DIONYSUS AND THE TYRRHENIAN PIRATES
When Dionysus was still a young boy, he found himself
in need of passage to the island of Naxos [map]. He
asked some Tyrrhenian (Etruscan) pirates for a ride and
the pirates agreed, but they actually planned to kidnap
him, believing that he was the son of a wealthy family
who would pay a hefty ransom for their child. While
at sea, the crew tried to tie him up, but the bonds fell
away of their own accord. At this point the helmsman
recognized that this was no ordinary boy and tried to
prevent any harm coming to Dionysus, but the captain
ignored the helmsman’s warning and told the sailors to
hold on to the boy. Suddenly, wine began to flow all
over the ship; vines began to grow from the sails and ivy
began to twine around the mast. Then Dionysus turned
into a lion and a bear appeared on the deck. The lion
seized the captain and began to tear him apart, and
the sailors jumped into the sea, turning into dolphins.
Dionysus, now back in human form, prevented the

82

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

helmsman from following his comrades into the sea
and told him that his aid would be rewarded and no
harm would come to him.

Dionysus and the Tyrrhenian pirates on a kylix in the Staatliche
Antikensammlungen in Munich

DIONYSUS AND PHRYGIA
Hera still hated Dionysus and she drove him mad,
causing him to run away and wander around the world
until he came to Phrygia (in what is now central Turkey).
Here he met Cybele, a Phrygian mother goddess whose

DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS

83

worship had been accepted by the Greeks. Cybele
cured him of his madness, and Dionysus established his
cult and rites of worship. Dionysus’ rites were similar
to those of Cybele, and they involved drinking, wild
dancing, playing the tambourine, and a feeling of
ecstasy, or divine possession. (“Ecstasy” is from a Greek
word meaning “to stand outside oneself.”) Dionysus
also gained a group of female followers, called
maenads (or bacchae or bacchants), who followed him
around, singing, dancing, drinking, and playing the
tambourine. Maenads (their name means “mad
women”) are usually shown in a state of ecstasy.
Dionysus is also usually accompanied by satyrs. Satyrs
are men with goat’s legs, horse’s tails, and a vigorous
appetite for wine and sex. They are often shown with
huge erections. Dionysus then set his sights on
establishing his worship in his homeland, so he traveled
back to Greece.

84

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS

85

A dancing maenad found in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in
New York City

GOD OR MORTAL?
Dionysus’ status as a god was always an issue. There
is an informal rule that if you have one divine parent
and one human parent, then you are a human (usually
a hero) and not a god. Examples include Achilles,
Theseus, Helen of Troy, Sarpedon, Aeneas, and many
others. But there were two exceptions to this rule:
Heracles (Hercules), who became a god and was taken
up to Mt. Olympus upon his death, and Dionysus.
Dionysus insisted that he was always a god (maybe
because he was born from Zeus’ thigh), and stories like
the Tyrrhenian Pirates (told above) seem to confirm
this. But no one believed him because his mother was
a mortal. So, when Dionysus traveled back to Greece
to establish his rites, he had trouble convincing people
that he really was a god.
RESISTANCE MYTHS
There are several Resistance Myths connected with
Dionysus. Resistance Myths are stories about men or
women who try to resist the worship of a particular
god or goddess. In these Resistance Myths, the attempt
of the mortal to resist the god’s worship always ends
badly: the god or goddess destroys the resisting human
and succeeds in establishing his or her worship. There
are a number of Resistance Myths attached to

86

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Dionysus, more than for any other god or goddess.
Mortals resisted Dionysus’ worship partly because they
did not believe he was a god, and partly because his
worship involved drinking, drunkenness, open sexual
expression, and the loss of one’s reason or self-control.

A maenad and an ithyphallic satyr on a kylix in the Staatliche
Antikensammlungen in Munich

The most famous Resistance Myth connected with
Dionysus occurred in his city of origin, Thebes, with his
cousin Pentheus. After Semele died, her sisters, most
notably Agave, spread the rumor that Semele had lied
about the paternity of her child and Zeus had punished

DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS

87

her for it with his thunderbolt. As a result, no one in
Thebes believed that Dionysus was divine. The years
passed, and because Cadmus, the King of Thebes, had
only daughters, he gave the throne to Agave’s son
Pentheus when he decided to retire. He was a very
young man, perhaps only about twenty or twenty-one
when he became King of Thebes. Dionysus came to
Thebes to introduce his worship to his homeland, but
Pentheus forbade any of the Theban women to worship
him. Pentheus probably did this because he did not
believe Dionysus was a god, but he also seems to have
been a straight and narrow kind of guy, who was
disgusted by Dionysus’ rituals. A third reason may have
been that Pentheus felt that this was a good
opportunity to establish his authority. At any rate,
Pentheus did not allow the women of Thebes to
worship Dionysus. Dionysus, however, caused all the
women of Thebes to go mad and run away from home.
They all left their fathers and husbands and ran away
to Mount Cithaeron, where they became maenads,
singing, dancing, drinking wine, and worshipping
Dionysus. Pentheus was upset at this behavior and
tried to imprison Dionysus, who had disguised himself
as a priest of Dionysus. The god easily escaped from
prison, of course, and he took a terrible revenge upon
Pentheus, which is depicted in Euripides’ play, The
Bacchae.

88

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Agave and Ino tearing apart Pentheus on a lekanis found in the
Louvre

MIDAS
Dionysus extensively traveled around the world. While
he was traveling to India, one of his older satyrs, Silenus
(when referred to in the plural, sileni, they are a group
of older and prophetic satyrs, and Silenus is usually
considered their leader), wandered away from the
group and (as he was a little drunk) he fell into a deep
sleep. While he was sleeping, he was captured by a
group of Phrygians, who sent Silenus to their king,
Midas. Midas cared for Silenus until Dionysus came to
collect him. Dionysus was grateful and offered Midas
any wish he desired as thanks. Midas asked for the
ability to turn anything he touched into gold, and being
unable to dissuade Midas from this wish, Dionysus
granted it. Midas was initially thrilled, but before too
long it became apparent that he could not eat or drink
because anything he tried to place in his mouth turned
to gold. Midas begged Dionysus to take the gift back,

DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS

89

but once a god gives a gift, it cannot be taken back.
However, Dionysus was able to help Midas and told him
to bathe in Pactolus river so that his gift would transfer
to the river (this myth explains why there is so much
gold in the river).
DIONYSUS AND ARIADNE
When Ariadne was abandoned by Theseus on Naxos,
Dionysus found her there and married her [see
Theseus]. She gave birth to several sons, and Hesiod
says that Zeus granted her immortality so she could live
with her husband. Some scholars believe that Ariadne
originated as a Cretan goddess who was downgraded
to a mortal when the Greeks appropriated the story.

90

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Bacchus and Ariadne by Titian (1520–1523) in the National
Gallery in London

THE ORIGIN OF DIONYSUS
Scholars are divided on the origins of Dionysus. He
seems to be a Mycenaean god because his name is
found in a Mycenaean inscription, but his myths and
rites (called orgia) are very eastern. His rituals involved
intoxication and a loss of control of the body (called
ecstasy, with ec- meaning “out” and -stasy meaning
“stand”; together they mean “to stand outside of
oneself and allow Dionysus to possess the body”) and
his sacrifices were performed by tearing the animal

DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS

91

limb from limb (this process is called “sparagmos”).
Sometimes Dionysus’ worshippers would eat the
sacrificial victim raw (this is called “homophagia”). These
strange rituals made the Greek traditionalists uneasy
because they had that foreign flair and flew in the face
of the Greek ideals of self-control and moderation
(sophrosyne).
At some point the theater was connected to
Dionysus, but it is unclear how that relationship began.
In Athens, the City Dionysia, a festival to Dionysus,
became the premier competition for playwrights to
show off their work and for Athens to show off its
cultural achievements to travelers coming through the
city. Dionysus may have been connected through his
ability to alter perception, much like theater did, and
the addition of the art form to the festival made the
proceedings more Greek in nature.

92

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

A maenad performing ritual “sparagmos” on a vase found in the
Cabinet des Médailles in Paris

Hades

Roman name: Pluto, Dis (wealth), or Orcus
Epithets: Aïdoneus (the Unseen One), All-Receiver,
Pluto (wealth)
Symbols: scepter, grain (fertility), rooster (fertility),
Cerberus
Functions: god of the Underworld and the dead

A krater depicting Hades and Persephone in the
Antikensammlungen Museum in Munich
93

94

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Hades was one of the children of Cronus and Rhea
whom their father swallowed. After being rescued by
his brother Zeus and helping Zeus gain control of the
cosmos [see Origins], the three brothers Zeus,
Poseidon, and Hades all drew lots to decide who would
rule over various parts of the world [See Zeus]. Hades
became the ruler of the Underworld. Hades was
married to his niece, Persephone, whom he abducted
[See Demeter].

A kylix depicting Persephone and Hades in the British Museum

There are very few myths about Hades other than the
story of how he abducted and married Persephone.

HADES

95

After the kerfuffle created by this incident had
subsided, Hades and Persephone seem to have settled
down to a rather ordinary married life as King and
Queen of the Dead.

Hades depicted as the Egyptian god Serapis with Cerberus and
Persephone depicted as the goddess Isis in the Museum in
Heraklion, Crete

The name of the Underworld is sometimes referred to
as Erebus (Ἔρεβος), which means “darkness” in Greek,
but it is more frequently called the House of Hades.
In practice, however, the name, “House of Hades,” is
usually shortened to just “Hades.” For this reason, the
term “Hades” refers to both the name of the god and
the name of the place over which he rules. Different
authors describe Hades (the Underworld) differently,

96

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

but there are several common features. The threeheaded dog, Cerberus, acts as a guard dog who
prevents dead souls from escaping as well as
preventing live people from getting in. There are
several rivers in Hades, including the Styx (Στύξ,
meaning “hateful”), which the gods swear by, and the
Acheron (Ἀχέρων, meaning “woeful”). Later authors
added the river Lethe (Λήθη, meaning “forgetfulness”),
which causes the souls who drink from it to forget their
past lives; see Plato, Republic 10.621 a-d and Vergil,
Aeneid 6.714-715.
For most people, life in the Underworld was a hollow
existence where their souls slowly lost consciousness
and continued on as shells of their former selves. (For
an extended portrayal of the souls in Hades, see
Homer, Odyssey, Book 11.) The Islands of the Blessed,
however, sometimes called Elysium or the Elysian
Fields, was a place where a select group of souls lived
in bliss. They kept their former personalities as well as
their consciousness, and they continued to pursue the
activities that had brought them pleasure while they
were alive. Homer says that Elysium is reserved for the
close relatives of the gods (Homer, Odyssey, 4.561-569)
while later authors, like Pindar (Olympians 2.68-78),
suggest that a virtuous life would allow a soul to spend
eternity in Elysium.

Hephaestus

Roman name: Vulcan or Mulciber
Function: god of the forge
Hephaestus was sometimes considered the son of
both Zeus and Hera, though other accounts say that
Hera gave birth to Hephaestus parthenogenically in
response to Zeus giving birth to Athena by himself. In
some versions of his birth, Hephaestus was born lame;
Hera was less than pleased and threw him off Mount
Olympus [see Olympus Mons on map]. Hephaestus
landed in the sea, where he was cared for by the sea
goddesses Thetis and Eurynome while he grew. He
soon proved to be a master craftsman, and he built a
beautiful throne for his mother that trapped her when
she sat in it. Numerous gods tried to convince
Hephaestus to release Hera, but he refused until
Dionysus came and got Hephaestus really drunk. This
aid rendered to her is often cited as the reason Hera
put aside her hatred of Dionysus [see Dionysus].
According to another version of his birth myth,
Hephaestus was born perfectly healthy, but when he
intervened on behalf of his mother in a dispute
between his parents, Hera and Zeus, Zeus flung
Hephaestus off Mount Olympus. Hephaestus fell for a
97

98

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

full day until he crash-landed on the island of Lemnos.
The Lemnians took care of him as best they could, but
the god was left crippled. Hephaestus was grateful to
the Lemnians and established his workshop on the
island. The Romans claimed that Vulcan’s forge was
located beneath Mount Aetna on the island of Sicily.
When the volcano on Mount Aetna erupted, the
Romans said that Vulcan was working in his forge.
Hephaestus was married to Aphrodite, but theirs was
not a happy marriage. Aphrodite had a long-standing
affair with the war god, Ares. Whenever Hephaestus
would leave home, Aphrodite and Ares would jump into
bed. When the sun god, Helius, informed Hephaestus
of what his wife did while he was away, Hephaestus
came up with a plan to catch the two in the act. He built
a golden net which was so fine that it was invisible and
set it up above his bed. He then told his wife that he
was taking a trip to Lemnos to visit his forge and hid.
Soon, Aphrodite and Ares were in the bed together and
the net fell upon them, trapping them right where they
were. Hephaestus came in with all the other Olympians
to jeer at the lovers, who were caught in flagrante delicto
(in a blazing crime).

HEPHAESTUS

Venus and Mars Surprised by a Net by Costantino Cedini in the
Palazzo Emo Capodilista in Padua, Italy

99

Hera

Roman name: Juno
Epithets: Cow-eyed, Eileithyia
Symbols: cow, peacock, scepter
Functions: goddess of marriage and consort to Zeus
THE BIRTH OF HERA
Hera was a daughter of Cronus and Rhea, and, like
her siblings (except Zeus), she was swallowed by her
father only to be rescued by her youngest brother, Zeus
[see Origins]. She married Zeus and became Queen
of the Gods. Together, they had three children: Ares,
Hebe (goddess of youth), and Eileithyia (goddess of
childbirth). Some versions say that Hephaestus is also
her son by Zeus, but more commonly she gave birth
to Hephaestus independently because she was angry
at Zeus for giving birth to Athena on his own [see
Hephaestus]. According to the Homeric Hymn to Apollo,
however, Hera actually gave birth to the monster
Typhoeus as a way to get back at Zeus for giving birth
to Athena.

100

HERA

101

Hera and Prometheus on a kylix in the Cabinet des Médailles in
Paris

HERA’S CHARACTER
Hera’s character is defined by her wrath. Despite being
the goddess of marriage, she was unable to prevent
her husband from constantly taking up new lovers. She
could not punish him, so she would punish the lovers
and the children produced from these affairs. She tried
to prevent Leto from giving birth [see Apollo], she
tricked Semele into her death [see Dionysus], and she

102

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

doggedly tortured Heracles throughout his life [see
Heracles]. Because Dionysus and Heracles eventually
became immortals, Hera had to make peace with them,
but it did not come easily [see Dionysus and Heracles].
Zeus once seduced and abducted a girl by the name of
Aegina, and he took her to the island of Oenone. Hera
threw a snake into the source of water for the entire
island, poisoning and killing most of the island to get
revenge on one girl. When Zeus fell in love with her
priestess, Io, and turned the maiden into a cow, Hera
was furious with the girl. After Hermes killed Argus,
who was keeping watch over Io [see Hermes], Hera
made Io wander the world as a cow until she came
to Egypt. She was transformed back into her human
form and bore a son. Hera arranged for the child to
be kidnapped. With the help of Zeus, mother and child
were eventually reunited and settled in Egypt where
Io eventually became the Egyptian goddess Isis (this
is only what the Greeks believed, the Egyptians had
worshiped Isis long before Greek culture began).

HERA

103

Juno and Argus by Peter Paul Rubens from 1610 in the
Wallraf-Richartz Museum in Cologne

The goddess’ wrath was not exclusive to Zeus’ lovers.
She helped the Argonauts over the course of their
adventure so she could punish Pelias for his impiety.
She blinded the seer, Teiresias, because he sided with
Zeus in an argument they asked him to solve. She sent
the Sphinx to Thebes to punish the king, Laïus, for
abducting Chrysippus, the son of Pelops. The Greeks
had Hera’s support in the Trojan War because she was
still angry over Paris’ decision to award Aphrodite the
Apple of Discord [see Intro to Iliad].

104

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

HERA’S ORIGIN
Hera most likely originated as a Pre-Hellenic goddess
of fertility, which runs into her role as a goddess of
all the stages of life for a woman: girl, new bride, and
old woman. She is often conflated with her daughter,
Eileithyia, as a goddess of childbirth, as is her Roman
counterpart, Juno, with the Roman goddess of
childbirth, Lucina. Hera had the unique ability to
become a virgin again every year by bathing in a spring
called the Canathus.

Heracles

Roman name: Hercules
Functions: son of Zeus, mortal hero, and eventually a
god
THE BIRTH OF HERACLES
Heracles was the son of Zeus and a mortal woman
named Alcmene. Alcmene was married to Amphitryon,
the heir to the throne of Tiryns. But Alcmene refused
to consummate her marriage until Amphitryon had
avenged the murder of her brothers, who had been
killed by the Taphian Pirates. So before even sleeping
with his wife, Amphitryon traveled to the Taphian
Islands (off the western coast of Greece, near Ithaca)
and stayed there for several weeks until he had killed all
of the Taphian Pirates. On the night before Amphitryon
returned from his journey, Zeus came to Alcmene in the
form and shape of her husband. He told her that he
had just come home from killing the pirates. Alcmene
was overjoyed, and gladly allowed him into her bed.
The next day when the real Amphitryon returned home,
he wondered why she did not give him a hero’s
105

106

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

welcome. After speaking with his wife, he discovered
the truth: Alcmene had spent the previous night with
someone else. Amphitryon did not believe Alcmene’s
story, that the man she had been with had looked and
sounded exactly like him, but the seer Teiresias told
him that the interloper had been Zeus himself and that
Alcmene’s story was true. Now Amphitryon believed
her and they finally consummated their marriage.
When Hera discovered that Alcmene was pregnant
with Zeus’ child, she was very unhappy, needless to
say. When Alcmene went into labor, Hera sent Eileithyia
to prevent the birth from taking place. Eileithyia sat
outside the delivery room crossing her fingers and legs,
which halted the delivery. (No birth can take place
unless Eileithyia is physically present and allows the
birth to proceed.) Alcmene, who was pregnant with twin
boys, was in a bad state and was close to breathing her
last breath when her nurse, Galanthis, came up with
a trick to break Eileithyia’s spell. She shouted that the
baby had already come. Eileithyia, in confusion as to
how this could have happened, jumped up and broke
her spell, allowing Alcmene to deliver two baby boys. In
her anger at being tricked, Eileithyia turned Galanthis
into a weasel. The two babies were named Iphicles and
Heracles. But the parents did not know which one of
their sons was Zeus’ child and which one was the child
of Amphitryon.

HERACLES

107

Heracles killing the snakes in his cradle on a stamnos in the
Louvre

HERACLES’ EARLY ADVENTURES
Hera did not leave Heracles alone for long. When he
was about eighteen months old, she sent two snakes to
kill both Iphicles and Heracles while they were sleeping
in their crib. While Iphicles screamed in terror and
cowered in the corner, Heracles grabbed hold of the
snakes and strangled one in each hand. Any doubt as
to which was the son of Zeus and which the son of
Amphitryon was solved by this event.

108

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Infant Hercules Strangling Serpents in his Cradle by Joshua
Reynolds (1788), in the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg,
Russia

As he grew, Heracles learned many important skills
from great teachers, but he had a short temper and did
not realize his own strength. When his music teacher,
Linus (who was the brother of Orpheus), reprimanded
him for not practicing enough, Heracles took his chair
and smashed it over Linus’ head, killing him instantly.
Amphitryon decided to send Heracles to live at his
country estate to protect his family.

HERACLES

109

Heracles killing his music teacher, Linus, on a cup in the
Antikensammlungen Museum in Munich

By the time Heracles was seventeen, he had grown to
be a tall and strong youth. Around the same time, a
lion was roaming in the area of Mount Cithaeron and
was terrorizing the countryside. Thespius, the king of
the area, asked Heracles to come and stay with him
and help his men kill the lion. Thespius also happened
to have fifty daughters. For fifty days Heracles went
out to find the lion, and each night Thespius sent a
different daughter in to sleep with Heracles, though
Heracles thought it was the same daughter each night.
After the fifty days, Heracles had killed the lion and all
of Thespius’ fifty daughters were pregnant.

110

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

HERA SENDS MADNESS
Heracles stayed in the area of Thebes [see Thebae on
map] long enough to distinguish himself in a war the
Thebans were fighting against a people called the
Minyans. The king of Thebes was so happy to have had
Heracles’ help that he offered his daughter, Megara,
to Heracles as a wife. Megara and Heracles married
and had two sons. They lived for a few years in peace,
but Hera was still out to torment Heracles, so she sent
madness to drive him mad. In his madness, Heracles
killed his wife and children. When he regained his
sanity, Heracles was devastated and decided to go to
the Oracle at Delphi [map] to ask Apollo how he could
be purified for this murder. The Pythia told him that
he must go to Tiryns and perform twelve labors for
the ruler, Eurystheus. If he could complete all twelve
labors successfully, he would not only be purified of the
murders, but he would achieve immortality. (The rule
is that if a hero has one mortal parent, he or she is
mortal. So Heracles was born a mortal, and this was
his opportunity to achieve immortality.) Heracles did
manage to successfully complete his twelve labors [see
12 Labors of Heracles].
THE DEATH OF IPHITUS
After these twelve labors, Heracles set out, looking for
a new wife with whom he could start over. Eurytus of
Oechalia, who had taught Heracles how to shoot a bow
and arrow, was looking for a husband for his daughter,
Iole. Eurytus had set up the condition that whoever

HERACLES

111

could beat him in an archery contest would win Iole,
and Heracles won easily.
However, Eurytus knew about the misfortunes
Heracles had had with Megara and refused to give Iole
to Heracles. Heracles was furious, but at this point
there was nothing he could do. At the same time this
was happening, some of Eurytus’ mares went missing
(sources vary on whether Heracles had anything to do
with the disappearance). Eurytus’ son, Iphitus, who
believed Heracles was innocent, went with Heracles to
find the mares. The two eventually ended up in Tiryns
at Heracles’ house. After they located the mares, the
two friends were drinking on the roof of Heracles’
house. What happened after that is not clear, but
somehow they got into an argument and Heracles
ended up throwing Iphitus from the roof. Heracles was
stricken with a disease as punishment for his crime.
When he consulted the Delphic Oracle, the Pythia told
Heracles that he had to sell himself as a slave for three
years for whatever price Iphitus’ sons established.
OMPHALE
Heracles did as the Pythia said and he was sold to
Omphale, the Queen and ruler of Lydia, who had
inherited power from her late husband. The kingdom
of Lydia had some enemies, and now that Omphale
had control of the kingdom, those enemies took the
opportunity to cause problems. Heracles used his
strength and fortitude to solve these problems for
Omphale, who was incredibly grateful. She freed
Heracles and the disease left him.

112

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

DEÏANEIRA
After many years, and many adventures, Heracles
found himself in Calydon, where he fell in love with
King Oeneus’ daughter, Deïaneira. Heracles had a rival
for her hand, though, in Acheloüs, a local river god.
The two fought until Heracles managed to break off
one of the god’s horns, which caused the god to yield.
Heracles and Deïaneira married, but they were not able
to live happily very long. Heracles, still not aware of
his strength, killed Oeneus’ cupbearer when he gave
the boy a quick blow as punishment for some offense.
Oeneus forgave his son-in-law, but Heracles, in his guilt,
insisted that he go into exile for his crime. Heracles left
Calydon with Deïaneira in tow.
At some point in their trip, Heracles and Deïaneira
came to a very deep and very large lake. Heracles could
easily swim across the lake, but Deïaneira could not,
and Heracles could not carry her while swimming
across. Just at that time, the centaur Nessus
approached the newlyweds and offered to ferry
Deïaneira across the river. Heracles gratefully agreed
to let Nessus swim across the river carrying Deïaneira
on his back. Halfway across the lake, however, Nessus
began to rape Deïaneira. Heracles heard her screams
and shot off one of his arrows dipped in the Hydra’s
blood. Of course, the arrow hit its mark and, as Nessus
knew, Hydra’s blood was a deadly poison. But Nessus
decided to get back at Heracles, even though he would
not live to see his revenge. As he lay dying, Nessus told
Deïaneira that if she took some of his blood and wiped
it on a robe for Heracles to wear, it would act as a love

HERACLES

113

potion. Of course, this was a lie. Deïaneira was aware
of her husband’s wandering affections, so she collected
some of Nessus’ blood and kept it in case she ever
had need of it. She had no idea that the deadly Hydra
poison was also a part of her “love potion”.

Heracles fighting the centaur Nessus on a nestoris found in the
Louvre

THE DEATH AND APOTHEOSIS OF HERACLES
Deïaneira was justified in her suspicions of her
husband, although nothing happened right away. But
many years later, Heracles decided to get revenge on
Eurytus, who had refused to give Heracles his daughter,
Iole, in marriage. Heracles killed Eurytus and his sons in
battle and brought Iole back home to be his concubine.
Deïaneira knew about her husband’s many affairs, but
she did not want to live in the same house with a

114

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

younger rival, so she decided to put Nessus’ plan into
action. She smeared Nessus’ blood on a beautiful new
robe and gave it to her husband when he returned
home, bringing Iole with him. Heracles put on the
handsome robe to give a thanksgiving offering to Zeus
for a successful return home, but as soon as he put
on the robe, his skin immediately caught fire. When
Heracles tried to take off the robe, parts of his skin
came off with it, and Heracles (now with parts of his
skin missing) continued to burn. Realizing the terrible
mistake she had made, Deïaneira took her own life. But
Heracles was in agony; he could not take off the robe
(because it was sticking to his skin), but he could not put
out the fire, and Heracles was burning so slowly that
it seemed to be taking forever for him to die. Heracles
decided to end his life as soon as possible.
He took his son Hyllus up into the mountains and
asked him to build a funeral pyre Hyllus agreed to build
the pyre, but he refused to light it because he could
not bear to end his father’s life. A passing shepherd
and his son, Philoctetes, agreed to light the pyre, and
so Heracles gave his famous bow and arrows to
Philoctetes.
The fire burned away Heracles’ mortal flesh and he
became immortal. He was taken up to Olympus to live
with the other gods and he married his half-sister,
Hebe. And Hera finally put aside her anger against him.
It seems that Heracles could only find peace after his
death.

Hermes

Roman name: Mercury
Epithets:
Argeïphontes
(Killer
of
Argus),
Psychopompos (Guide of Souls), Hermes the Helper
Symbols: caduceus (kerykeon), winged sandals,
petasos (traveling hat)
Functions: messenger to the gods and god of
travelers, traders, thieves, herds, and heralds

115

116

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Hermes carrying a ram on an olpe found in the Louvre

THE BIRTH OF HERMES AND THE THEFT OF

HERMES

117

APOLLO’S CATTLE
Hermes was the son of Zeus and Maia, a nymph who
lived on Mount Cyllene. Hermes was very mischievous,
and within hours of his birth, Hermes was already
getting himself into trouble. When he was only one day
old, he left his mother’s cave to see the world and ran
into a tortoise, which he killed and then fashioned into
an instrument, inventing the lyre. Later that day, he
slipped out again and made his way to Pieria, the place
the gods used to pasture their cattle, and stole fifty
of Apollo’s cattle, taking great care to confuse anyone
trying to track them by forcing the cattle to walk
backwards. He also made sandals for himself by tying
twigs to the bottoms of his feet in order to hide his
footprints. Hermes drove the cattle far away, and hid
them in a cave not far from the river Alpheios, in the
Peloponnese [map]. Hermes then decided to sacrifice
two of the cattle to the gods. He rubbed two sticks
together, thus inventing both fire-sticks and fire. He
slaughtered two of the cattle and sacrificed the meat to
the gods, not keeping any for himself. He then hid the
evidence of his crime by burning the carcasses of the
animals and throwing his make-shift sandals in a river.
By this time, it was evening. Hermes hurried home,
wrapped himself in his swaddling clothes, and slipped
back into his cradle, feigning innocence.

118

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

A Muse playing a lyre, the instrument invented by Hermes, found
in the Staatliche Antikensammlungen in Munich

The next morning, Apollo noticed that some of his cattle
were missing and came looking for them. Despite

HERMES

119

Hermes’ efforts to hide his crime, Apollo managed to
discover the fate of his cattle and came to confront
his younger half-brother. Apollo threatened to throw
Hermes into Tartarus and imprison him there if he
didn’t give back the cattle, but Hermes replied, “I was
born yesterday! How could I possibly steal anyone’s
cattle? I don’t even know what cattle are!” The two were
unable to settle their dispute, so they took their case
to their father. Zeus was amused by Hermes’ insistence
that he was innocent, but decreed that the infant return
the cattle to Apollo. Hermes showed Apollo where he
had hidden the cattle, but before Apollo could take
them away, Hermes picked up the lyre he had created
and began to play. The music so enraptured Apollo
that he begged Hermes to give it to him. Hermes then
suggested a deal: in exchange for the instrument,
Apollo would trade his cattle and the position of divine
herdsman. Apollo agreed. Zeus confirmed the pact
between the two half-brothers, and decreed that
Hermes would become the messenger of the gods
(Homeric Hymn to Hermes). Hermes also became a
trickster god and the god of thieves, as well as the
god of travelers and traders and a helper to men. He
also carried the caduceus or herald’s wand (a gift from
Apollo) as a sign of his position. And he invented the
panpipes (several reeds or hollow bamboo sticks of
different lengths, tied together with string) so he would
have his own instrument to play.

120

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The caduceus of Hermes has been appropriated by the Medical
Corps as their symbol.

HERMES AS GUIDE OF DEAD SOULS
As an extension of his role as protector of travelers,
one of Hermes’ jobs was to lead the dead souls down
to Hades. He would take the souls to the river Styx
where Charon, the ferryman, would take the souls of

HERMES

121

the dead to the other side as long as they had been
buried properly with a coin placed under the tongue
as a payment for Charon. Hermes is often depicted in
art as leading away a dead person’s soul. One example
is the famous relief sculpture in the Naples Museum
of Hermes leading Eurydice back into Hades just after
Orpheus had looked back at her on their way out of the
Underworld [see Orpheus].
HERMES THE HELPER
Hermes earned his epithet “the helper” many times
over by aiding both gods and mortals. Zeus often
employed him not only in sending messages but also
in performing tasks the father of gods and men was
not able to do himself. One such instance was with
Io, a mortal woman Zeus amorously pursued. Io was a
priestess to Hera who caught Zeus’ eye, and so Zeus
sent her dreams commanding her to join him in the
fields where her father kept his flocks. Eventually, she
came to the meadow, but when she realized what Zeus
wanted, she ran away, and Zeus pursued her. Hera,
eager to catch her husband in the act, had been
observing him and came down from Olympus to
confront her husband. Zeus quickly turned Io into a
cow to hide his promiscuity from his wife. Hera, who
knew the cow was really a girl, asked her husband if
he would give her the beautiful cow as a present and
he had to acquiesce in order not to give away his trick.
Hera placed Io in a grove, guarded by Argus Panoptes
(meaning “all-eyes”), a hundred-eyed monster.

122

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Mercury and Argus by Peter Paul Rubens (1635–1638) in the
Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister in Dresden

Zeus sent the god of thieves to bring him Io, but not
even Hermes could steal her away because Argus was
able to make his eyes sleep in shifts so he could
constantly watch the girl. Hermes decided to disguise
himself as a goatherd. He sat down by Argus and gently
played his panpipes until all of Argus’ eyes had closed
in sleep. Once he had done this, Hermes took up his
sword and cut off the head of the monster, earning his
name Argeïphontes.

HERMES

123

Mercury and Argus by Peter Paul Rubens (1636–1638) in the
Prado Museum in Madrid

Hermes helped his father another time by rescuing his
unborn half-brother Dionysus from womb of his
mother, Semele, as she perished in flames [see
Dionysus]. Zeus was not the only beneficiary of Hermes’
help; mortals were also guided by Hermes. He showed
Odysseus how to overcome the dangerous witch, Circe
[Homer, Odyssey, 10]; he helped Priam, king of Troy,
travel safely into the Greek camp during the Trojan War
to plead with Achilles for the body of his son, Hector
[Homer, Iliad, 24]; and he, along with Athena, gave the
hero Perseus all the equipment he needed to slay the
Gorgon, Medusa.
PAN
Hermes had many children, one of which was Pan, a
god born with horns and a goat’s legs. Pan was also

124

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

said to have invented the panpipes, which he frequently
played. Pan was able to inflict fear, or “panic” (which
comes from the god’s name), in the hearts of mortals
with just a shout.
HERMS
Since he was the protector of travelers, statues of
Hermes’ head and a phallus on stone pillars (called
herms) were placed along roads, at cross roads, and
in courtyards and town squares for good luck. These
statues were taken very seriously, since they were
representations of the god; harm to them could have
disastrous consequences. According to Thucydides, just
before the Athenians started on their ill-fated Sicilian
Expedition, someone smashed the faces of almost all
of the herms throughout the city, a bad portent for the
fate of the expedition and an ominous foreshadowing
for when the expedition ultimately failed (Thucydides
6.27).

HERMES

An ithyphallic herm in the National Archaeological Museum in
Athens

125

Hestia

Roman name: Vesta
Function: goddess of the hearth
Hestia was the oldest child of Cronus and Rhea, thus
she was the first to be swallowed by Cronus and last
to come back out when Zeus rescued his siblings [see
Origins]. She is both anthropomorphic (i.e., she is a
goddess with a human form) and the physical
manifestation of the actual hearth in every home,
temple, and city. In fact, her name (῾Εστία) is also the
Greek word for the hearth. Hestia was a virgin goddess
who does not appear in many myths. She was highly
honored, usually receiving the first offering at sacrifices,
but she had few cult activities that were specially
dedicated to her. However, to the Romans, Vesta was
one of the most important deities. The priestesses of
Vesta, called the Vestal Virgins, tended to the city
hearth, keeping the goddess’ flame burning.

126

The Iliad – An Introduction

The Iliad is an epic that tells about only a few weeks
during the Trojan War. The Iliad does not tell the entire
story of the war, which is supposed to have lasted for
ten years. But the audience is expected to be familiar
with the entire story of the Trojan War, including all the
events that occurred before and after the war. These
pre- and post-war events are referred to in the Iliad, but
they are not explained, so here are a few of the most
important stories.
THE BIRTH OF PARIS
The story begins in Troy with King Priam and his wife,
Hecuba. Hecuba was pregnant and one night she had
a dream in which the child she was carrying was a
firebrand (a piece of burning wood used to start fires),
and the firebrand set fire to the entire city. When
Hecuba told her dream to her daughter, Cassandra,
Cassandra prophesied that the child Hecuba was
carrying was destined to destroy the city. Cassandra
advised her parents to expose the child as soon as he
was born. But Cassandra was fated never to be believed
127

128

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

[see Apollo], and so her parents said they would not
think of doing such a terrible thing. When Paris was
born, he was a very handsome baby, and his parents
treasured him greatly. (By the way, in the Iliad, Paris
is also sometimes referred to as Alexandros or
Alexander.)
THE WEDDING OF PELEUS AND THETIS
Many years later, all the gods were excited about
attending the wedding of Peleus and Thetis. Peleus was
a mortal man who had distinguished himself as one of
the Argonauts [see Argonauts]. Thetis was a gorgeous
and desirable sea goddess, but she was fated to give
birth to a son who would be stronger than his father.
When Zeus and Poseidon, who were both very
interested in her, learned of this prophesy, they were
suddenly very eager to marry her off to a mortal man.

THE ILIAD – AN INTRODUCTION

129

Jupiter and Thetis by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres (1811) in
the Musée Granet in Aix-en-Provence, France

The wedding was a splendid affair, attended by all the
gods and goddess except one. Eris, the Goddess of
Discord, was not invited because of her tendency to
cause problems among the gods. Eris was, of course,
offended by the slight and created a sure way to cause
as much strife as possible. She took a golden apple and

130

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

inscribed the words “for the fairest” upon it and threw
it among the party guests. There were three goddesses,
each of whom believed that the apple was meant for
her: Athena, Hera, and Aphrodite.
THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS
The goddesses took their dispute to Zeus, who wisely
refused to judge the matter, knowing it would only
cause trouble for him. Zeus decided that the
handsomest man on earth should decide the contest,
and the handsomest man on earth turned out to be
none other than Paris, who was now about twenty
years of age. So all three goddesses went to Troy and
asked Paris to decide which one of them was the most
beautiful and should be awarded the golden apple.
Each goddess secretly promised a gift to Paris if he
should pick her. Athena offered to make sure he was
always victorious in battle, Hera promised to make him
ruler of the world, and Aphrodite promised to give him
the most beautiful woman in the world. Paris naturally
awarded the apple to Aphrodite. There was just one
catch: the most beautiful woman in the world
happened to be Helen of Sparta, and she was already
married to Menelaus, the king of Sparta.

THE ILIAD – AN INTRODUCTION

131

The Judgement of Paris by Peter Paul Rubens (1638–1639) in the
Prado Museum in Madrid

THE ABDUCTION OF HELEN
Paris decided to take a trip to Sparta [map]. Paris was
accepted into the house of Menelaus, the king of
Sparta. Because of the laws of guest-friendship [see
Xenia], Paris was invited to stay as long as he wished.
Soon after Paris’ arrival, Menelaus had to journey to
Crete [see Creta on map] for his grandfather’s funeral.
He left his wife and household, instructing them to
make sure Paris was treated well. Aphrodite took the
opportunity to send Eros to shoot Helen with his arrow,
and Helen fell in love with Paris. Paris absconded with
Helen (and quite a bit of Menelaus’ treasure) and went
home to Troy while Menelaus was still away.
When Menelaus found his wife and wealth gone, he
was quite angry. In addition to his personal desire for
vengeance, Menelaus knew that Paris had violated the
laws of xenia, and that Zeus punished those who

132

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

violated these laws. So Menelaus called upon his
brother, Agamemnon, who was the king of Mycenae
[see Argos on map] and the richest and most powerful
of all the Greek kings. Together, Menelaus and
Agamemnon called on all the other Greek kings to join
an expedition to Troy to bring Helen back to Sparta.
But why would the other kings want to join such
a dangerous expedition? Before Helen and Menelaus
married, nearly every eligible bachelor in Greece
wanted to marry her, since she was the most beautiful
woman in the world. Tyndareüs, Helen’s earthly father,
declared (at the advice of one of the suitors, Odysseus)
that before he made his decision, all the suitors should
swear an oath to come to the aid of the man he chose
as Helen’s husband if he should ever have a problem
with Helen being abducted by someone else. The
suitors all agreed and swore an oath. And now
Menelaus invoked this oath and asked for their help to
fight against Troy. Besides, Troy was the wealthiest city
in the world, so all the Greek warriors would be sure to
bring back a great deal of loot (assuming they won the
war).
ODYSSEUS JOINS THE EXPEDITION
Not all the Greeks were easily persuaded to join the
fight. Odysseus, the King of Ithaca [map], preferred to
stay home with his wife and infant son. When Menelaus
came to Ithaca to remind Odysseus of his oath,
Odysseus decided to pretend to be crazy. Menelaus
found him plowing his fields and sowing the fields with
salt instead of seed (sowing salt prevents anything from

THE ILIAD – AN INTRODUCTION

133

growing). Menelaus knew this was exactly the sort of
trick Odysseus would pull, so to test how crazy
Odysseus really was, he placed Odysseus’ son,
Telemachus, in the path of Odysseus’ plow.
(Telemachus was about a year and a half old at this
time.) When Odysseus pulled the plow away so he
didn’t hurt the baby, he showed how sane he was. So
Menelaus forced him to be true to his oath and join the
expedition against Troy.
ACHILLES JOINS THE EXPEDITION
Odysseus was instrumental in recruiting Achilles for the
Trojan War. Achilles’ mother, Thetis, knew that if
Achilles went to Troy he would not come back, so she
did not want to let him go. Besides, Achilles was only
about fifteen years old at this time. So Thetis dressed
her son in girl’s clothing and she hid him on the island
of Scyrus among the daughters of King Lycomedes. But
Odysseus knew how to find out which one was Achilles.
Odysseus dressed as a merchant and traveled to
Scyrus, where he displayed his wares for all the girls to
see. He set out some lovely jewelry and clothing, but
he also set out some handsome weapons. All the girls
flocked to the jewelry except one, who was examining
the weapons. Odysseus knew that this “girl” was
Achilles in disguise, and he easily persuaded the young
hero to join the expedition to Troy. By the way, by
the time Achilles left, one of Lycomedes’ daughters,
Deïdameia, was pregnant with Achilles’ child.
Deïdameia later gave birth to Neoptolemus. Because

134

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Achilles never did return from Troy, Neoptolemus was
his only child.

Discovery of Achilles on Skyros by Nicolas Poussin from around
1651 found in the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston

THE SACRIFICE OF IPHIGENIA
The Greek warriors and their ships all gathered at Aulis
for the long voyage to Troy. But just when they were
about to leave, Artemis sent contrary winds, preventing
them from leaving. The Greeks were forced to stay at
Aulis for a month; their supplies were getting low and
their tempers were getting short. In the end,
Agamemnon was forced to sacrifice his daughter,
Iphigenia, to Artemis so that Artemis would stop the
contrary winds and allow them to set sail for Troy. For

THE ILIAD – AN INTRODUCTION

135

the full story of how this happened, see Agamemnon
and Iphigenia.
THE BEGINNING OF THE TROJAN WAR
When the Greek fleet finally reached Troy, they found
that the fight was not quick or easy. The walls of Troy
were very strong (they had been built by Poseidon and
Apollo [see Poseidon]), and the Trojans and their allies
were great warriors. So the Greeks beached their ships
and built a camp on the shore, and they settled in
for a long war. The Trojan War went on for ten years;
sometimes the Greeks came very close to taking the
city, and sometimes the Trojans came very close to
destroying the Greeks’ ships and their camp. The Greek
troops also raided the nearby allies of the Trojans to
gain plunder and supplies for themselves and to
prevent food from reaching Troy. The Iliad picks up in
the ninth year of the war when everyone is extremely
tired and cranky from the long, protracted struggle.

136

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Ajax and Achilles playing draughts on an amphora in the Vatican
Museum

FIGHTING AT TROY
The Greeks fought at Troy for ten years without being
able to conquer the great, walled city. Although the Iliad
does not tell the story of the death of Achilles, we know
that he dies before Troy falls. Paris kills him with an
arrow. Remember, the entire Iliad takes place during a
few weeks of the 9th year.

THE ILIAD – AN INTRODUCTION

137

Hypnos (Sleep) and Thanatos (Death) carry away the body of
Sarpedon on a krater housed in the Archaeological Museum of
Cerveteri, Italy

After Achilles’ death, the Greeks were still unable to
conquer Troy, even though they had fulfilled the four
conditions that Helenus, the Trojan seer, had said were
necessary before Troy could fall. (Those conditions
were: Achilles’ son Neoptolemus had to fight on the
Greek side, the bow and arrows of Heracles must be
used against the Trojans, the remains of the famous
hero Pelops must be brought from Greece to Troy, and
the ancient statue of Athena, called the Palladium, must
be stolen from the Trojan citadel.) The cunning
Odysseus finally thought of a plan that would allow
them to get inside the walls and capture Troy.

138

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Trojan Horse depicted on a pithos in the Archaeological
Museum of Mykonos

THE TROJAN HORSE
During the night, the Greeks built a huge, wooden
horse, too big to fit inside the walls of Troy. They hid
some of their best warriors inside, and sailed off to
the neighboring island of Tenedos. When the Trojans
awoke to find the Greek army gone and a huge wooden
horse in its place (inscribed with the words: “For their
return home the Greeks dedicate this thank offering to
Athena.”), they joyfully brought the horse into their city,
even breaking down part of their city walls in order to
do it. That night, while the Trojans slept soundly after
a day of feasting and celebrating, the Greek warriors
crept out of the horse and opened the city gates to
the rest of the Greek army, which had sailed back from
Tenedos, and the Greeks captured the city and burnt it

THE ILIAD – AN INTRODUCTION

139

to the ground. During the fall of Troy, Ajax the Lesser
(the son of Oïleus, called “the Lesser” to distinguish him
from the great warrior Ajax, the son of Telemon) raped
Cassandra in Athena’s temple. For the full story, see
Athena.

Ajax the Lesser raping Cassandra while she seeks refuge at the
statue of Athena on a cup in the Louvre

RETURNS (ODYSSEY)
After fighting at Troy for ten years, many of the Greek
princes had long and difficult voyages home. Menelaus
wandered the seas for seven years before returning

140

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

home to Sparta, and Odysseus took ten years to reach
home, so that he was gone for twenty years in all.
Agamemnon returned home quickly and safely, but as
soon as he returned he was murdered by his wife,
Clytemnestra (with help from her lover, Aegisthus), who
was angry over the sacrifice and murder of her
daughter, Iphigenia. For more on the stories of the
Greek warriors’ returns, see The Odyssey.

Jason

Functions: hero and leader of the Argonauts
THE BIRTH OF JASON
Jason was the son of Aeson, the rightful king of Iolcus.
Before Jason was born, his uncle, Pelias, took the
throne from Aeson. Aeson and his wife still lived in
Iolcus, but they lived with the constant threat of death
over them. After Jason was born, in order to protect him
from the wrath of his uncle, Aeson sent his son to the
nearby Mount Pelion to be raised by the centaur [see
Centaurs], Chiron.
For years, Pelias lived in fear of a man with one
sandal because he had been told by the Delphic Oracle
that he was fated to be killed by a man who was
wearing only one sandal. When Jason turned twentyone, he decided to reclaim the throne and returned to
Iolcus to confront his uncle. In order to get there, he
had to cross a river, and on the bank sat an old woman
asking to be carried across. Jason did not know that the
woman was Hera in disguise, testing the young man to
see if he was worthy to help her in destroying Pelias,
141

142

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

who had scorned her many times. In the process of
carrying the goddess through the water, Jason lost one
of his sandals, and he continued the rest of the way
wearing only one.
HOW JASON WAS SENT TO BRING BACK THE
GOLDEN FLEECE
Once the youth came to Iolcus, news of the man with
one sandal quickly reached Pelias. He met with the
young man, who revealed his identity and stated his
intention to regain his father’s throne. Pelias was afraid
to kill Jason outright, so he asked him what he would
do with a man who was destined to kill him. Jason
responded saying that he would ask the man to retrieve
the Golden Fleece. (The Golden Fleece came from a
magical golden ram who had saved the youth Phrixus
from death by carrying him to the land of Colchis. Once
they had arrived in Colchis, the ram told Phrixus to
sacrifice him and hang the fleece in a grove sacred to
Ares, where it was guarded by a dragon.) Upon hearing
Jason’s answer, Pelias asked his nephew to fetch the
Fleece from Colchis. Another version states that Pelias
was kind to his nephew and told him that the oracle
at Delphi had told him that the dishonored spirit of
Phrixus needed to be returned home to Thessaly along
with the Fleece to appease the underworld gods
[Pindar]. In either case, Jason agreed to go to Colchis
and bring back the Golden Fleece, and he organized an
expedition which included some of the greatest heroes
in Greece at the time [See Argonauts].

JASON

143

JASON AND MEDEA
The Argonauts returned to Iolcus with the Golden
Fleece, bringing with them Jason’s new wife, the
Colchian princess Medea (who was also a witch). Jason
suspected that his uncle would not hand over the
kingship, so the group stayed outside the city while
trying to figure out what to do. Medea came up with
a plan to rid them of the problem. Using her magic,
she disguised herself as an old woman and went to the
palace, claiming to be a priestess of Artemis who had
come to rejuvenate the king. When she transformed
from an old woman into her real, youthful form, Pelias
agreed to allow her to bring back his youth. Medea
told his daughters that they needed to cut their father
into pieces and boil him in her cauldron with some
magical herbs in order for the process to work. The girls
were naturally skeptical, but Medea convinced them
by performing the procedure on a ram. When a little
lamb leaped from the cauldron, they agreed to cut their
father into pieces. Of course, when the daughters of
Pelias tried this, their rejuvenated father did not spring
out of the cauldron. Medea probably “forgot” to put the
right herbs into the cauldron; in any case, Pelias was
dead.
Pelias’ son, Acastus, who was one of the Argonauts,
became king at his father’s death and exiled Jason and
Medea for the brutal killing of his father. The king of
Corinth, Creon, offered them a home in his kingdom
on account of the fame the expedition of the Argo had
brought to Jason. There they lived peacefully for about
ten years, and they had two sons. Eventually though,

144

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Jason grew tired of living with a barbarian witch who
brought him no social standing, and Creon offered his
daughter, named either Glauce or Creusa, in marriage
to the hero. Jason divorced Medea and married the
princess.
Medea was devastated and most of all angry at the
betrayal. After all, she had helped Jason steal the
Golden Fleece, she had helped him sail safely back to
Greece, and she had helped him punish Pelias for
seizing the throne; she had also born him two sons to
perpetuate his line. But Medea was not about to suffer
in silence; she hatched a plan to hurt Jason in every
way possible. She sent her sons to deliver wedding gifts
for the princess: a tiara and a beautiful dress. As soon
as the princess put them on, however, they burst into
flames. Her father, hearing her screams, ran to help,
but once he had touched her he could not pull away,
and he burned alive alongside his daughter. Medea’s
sons, because they were accessories to the murders,
were in danger as well. Some versions say the
Corinthians killed the boys and later the spirits of the
children punished the city for their murder, but the
more prominent version, popularized by Euripides, has
Medea herself killing the children to take revenge on
their father. Medea, who was the granddaughter of
Helius, the sun, asked for and received her
grandfather’s chariot (drawn by four winged horses) to
help her escape. Medea flew to Athens in Helius’ chariot
and went to live with King Aegeus [see Theseus]. Some
accounts say that Jason took his own life, but the more
popular story is that many years after these events he
was sitting under the rotting ruins of the Argo, the ship

JASON

145

that had made him so famous, when a beam from the
ship fell and struck him on the head, killing him.

Miasma

Miasma (μίασμα) means “stain,” “defilement,” or “the
stain of guilt” in Greek. It is usually translated as
“pollution” in English, although there is no concept in
English that precisely corresponds to miasma. Miasma
is a god-sent disease that is caused by a murder that
has not been atoned for (with proper purification
rituals). A miasma can fall upon an entire city when one
man in that city is guilty of a murder and has not atoned
for it. A miasma can infect everyone on board a ship if
one man on that ship is guilty of murder.
Miasma can spread like a disease, and it seems to
be the objectification of guilt. In other words, the guilt
is understood as a kind of disease that can spread to
everyone who comes in contact with the guilty person.
The concept of germs was not developed until the
1880s, but the effects of contagion were clearly visible
from a very early time. The Greeks seem to have
believed that the cause of contagious disease was guilt
for an unexpiated crime. The only way to stop the
spread of the disease was to find the guilty party, have
that person atone for their crime by paying a penalty
(usually a fine or banishment), and undergo an
expiation ritual (frequently a sacrifice of a suckling pig).
146

MIASMA

147

You could classify miasma as a psychological myth
(since it is the manifestation of the emotion of guilt) or
you could understand it as a natural aetiological myth,
since it explains the natural phenomenon of contagious
disease.
When Oedipus the King begins, the city of Thebes is
infected with a miasma: a disease has fallen on the
crops, the cattle are dying, a plague is raging through
the land, and all the children are stillborn. The Oracle
at Delphi proclaims that the miasma is caused by the
unexpiated murder of Laius, the previous king. Apollo
declares that the murderer is still living in Thebes and
that he must be found and punished (either by
banishment or death) in order for the miasma to come
to an end.

The Minotaur

Function: half-man, half-bull monster
The Minotaur (which means “Minos’ bull”) was the
son of Pasiphaë, the wife of Minos (the king of Crete),
and a large and handsome bull. Minos had asked
Poseidon for a magnificent bull to sacrifice to him and
the god obliged, sending a handsome bull from the
sea. However, when Minos saw the bull, he refused
to sacrifice it because it was so beautiful. Poseidon,
completely enraged, caused Minos’ wife, Pasiphaë, to
lust after the bull. She convinced Daedalus, the famous
engineer, to aid her in consummating her desire for
the bull by making her a hollow wooden cow. Pasiphaë
then climbed into the cow and was able to mate with
the bull. The result was a child who was half human and
half bull. Minos then had Daedalus build a maze, called
a labyrinth, to house the Minotaur. To read the story of
how Theseus killed the Minotaur, see Theseus.

148

THE MINOTAUR

Theseus Slaying the Minotaur by Antoine-Louis Barye (1843) in
the Baltimore Museum of Art

149

The Odyssey – An
Introduction

150

THE ODYSSEY – AN INTRODUCTION

151

Odysseus blinding Polyphemus on an amphora in the
Archaeological Museum in Eleusis

The Odyssey tells the story of the Greek hero Odysseus’

152

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

return home from the Trojan War. Although the Odyssey
focuses on Odysseus’ story, it also tells about the
returns of four other heroes: Nestor, Agamemnon,
Menelaus, and the Lesser Ajax. These stories are told
piecemeal and in flashbacks, so they are a little more
difficult to follow. Furthermore, there are also a few
events that happened between the end of the Iliad and
the beginning of the Odyssey that are helpful to know.

A bronze figurine of one of the men turned into pigs by Circe in
the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore

THE DEATH OF ACHILLES
The first of these events is the death of Achilles, which
came at the hands of Paris with the help of Apollo. The
Greeks were fighting near the gates of Troy and Paris
shot at Achilles with his bow, which Apollo guided to
Achilles’ one vulnerable spot, his ankle. This was the
only vulnerable spot on Achilles’ body because his

THE ODYSSEY – AN INTRODUCTION

153

mother tried to make him immortal when he was a
baby by dipping him in the River Styx. Since she held
him by the ankle, the waters of the Styx did not touch
that part of him, so he was mortal and vulnerable in
that spot.
THE SUICIDE OF AJAX
After Achilles’ death, it was decided that his armor
should be given to the second-greatest Greek warrior
after Achilles. As we know from Book 18 of the Iliad,
Achilles had immortal armor, which had been crafted
for him by the god Hephaestus to make up for the
armor he had lost when Patroclus had worn it into
battle (and Hector had taken it after he killed Patroclus).
Now that Achilles, the greatest of the Achaeans, was
dead, it was agreed that his immortal armor should
go to the second greatest warrior. Everyone knew that
the second greatest warrior was the Greater Ajax, the
son of Telamon. He was huge, he was brave, and he
was selfless; he spent all his time protecting the other
Achaeans. But Odysseus used his amazing speaking
ability to convince Agamemnon and Menelaus (who
were judging the contest) that his cleverness made him
more valuable than Ajax (who was not known for his
wits) and that he, Odysseus, was in fact the secondbest Greek warrior. As a result, Odysseus was awarded
Achilles’ armor, even though everyone knew in their
hearts that Ajax really deserved it. Ajax was so mortified
by being passed over for an honor that he felt was
rightfully his that he killed himself in shame. And, as we

154

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

will see when we read the Odyssey, Odysseus later came
to deeply regret his “win”.

A small bronze figurine of Odysseus tied to the underside of a
ram to escape Polyphemus in the Archaeological Museum of
Delphi

THE BOW OF HERACLES AND THE PALLADIUM
Meanwhile, the Trojan War raged on, despite the
deaths of both Hector and Achilles. The Greeks learned
from Helenus, a son of Priam whom they had captured,
that they needed to complete two tasks before they
could capture Troy. First of all, they needed Heracles’
bow, and second, they needed to capture the
Palladium, a wooden statue of Athena that was kept
in Athena’s temple in Troy. The Greeks first set out
to acquire Heracles’ bow, which was a difficult task
because Heracles had given it to his friend, Philoctetes,

THE ODYSSEY – AN INTRODUCTION

155

before he died. Many years earlier, at the beginning
of the Trojan War, the Greeks had abandoned him on
a desert island, so he hated the Greeks and did not
want to give them Heracles’ bow. But eventually, with
the help of Achilles’ son, Neoptolemus, they were able
to convince him to give them Heracles’ bow. The entire
story, including the reason why the Greeks abandoned
Philoctetes in the first place, is told in Sophocles’ play,
Philoctetes.
Then the Greeks needed to somehow acquire the
Palladium, since Helenus had told them that as long as
the Palladium was inside Athena’s temple, the city could
not fall. Odysseus and Diomedes snuck into the city in
disguise and stole the Palladium, taking it with them to
the Greek camp.
THE TROJAN HORSE
Now the only thing standing between the Greeks and
victory were the impressive walls of Troy. Odysseus
hatched a scheme to get the Greeks inside the city.
A giant, hollow wooden horse was constructed and a
select group of warriors was placed inside. The rest
of the Greeks sailed just out of sight of Troy, waiting
for a signal from the city to come back. The Trojans,
when they saw that the Greek army had left, assumed
that the Greeks had finally admitted defeat and had
sailed back home. The Trojans took the horse, which
they believed to be a thank-offering to Athena for a safe
trip home, inside their city. That night they celebrated
the end of the war with an amazing party and then fell
into a drunken sleep. While the city slept, the Greek

156

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

warriors came out of the wooden horse. They quickly
went to the gates, opened them, and then lit a fire as
a signal to the Greek fleet that they were ready for
reinforcements. The Greek fleet returned, the warriors
inside the city opened the gates, and the Greeks burned
and pillaged the city, razing it to the ground.

THE ODYSSEY – AN INTRODUCTION

157

This is a famous Athenian red-figure vase (c. 480–470 BC)
showing Odysseus tied to the mast, listening to the Sirens’ song,
as his crew rows past their island. This vase shows the Sirens as
part-woman and part-bird, although Homer seems to imagine
them in completely female form. This very well-known vase, on
display in the British Museum, has become the basis for several
modern depictions of the Sirens, including the one by N. C.
Wyeth, below.

158

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

N. C. (Newell Convers) Wyeth was one of the greatest American
illustrators of the early twentieth century. This painting, from a
1929 edition of The Odyssey, is clearly modeled on the Sirens
vase in the British Museum, but it depicts Odysseus tied to the
mast in a Christ-like pose, while the Sirens seem to embody
sexual temptation. N. C. Wyeth (1882–1945), The Sirens, 1929, oil
on canvas, 48 1/2 x 38 1/4″. Brandywine Museum purchase,
1991.

THE ODYSSEY – AN INTRODUCTION

159

THE SACK OF TROY AND THE RETURNS
The Greeks were savage in their sack of the city and
their actions had lasting consequences on their
journeys home. The Lesser Ajax (the son of Oïleus,
called “Lesser” to distinguish him from the more
famous warrior named Ajax) raped Cassandra in
Athena’s temple. As you can imagine, Athena was
furious, and she found a way to punish him so that
he did not survive [see Athena]. Neoptolemus killed
Priam at the altar of Zeus, but when he arrived home
he was killed by Orestes in a quarrel over Hermione,
the daughter of Helen and Menelaus. Menelaus had
promised Hermione to Neoptolemus but then later
gave her to his nephew, Orestes. Agamemnon arrived
home quickly and without incident, but as soon as he
arrived he was killed at a banquet by his wife’s lover,
Aegisthus. Menelaus was blown off course to Egypt,
and he spent seven years in Egypt before finally arriving
home to Sparta. Odysseus was blown around the entire
Mediterranean Sea and was not able to return home
until ten years after the Trojan War was over (as we will
see in the Odyssey). Only one important Greek warrior
made it home quickly with no negative consequences:
Nestor. We will discuss why Nestor alone had no
difficulties getting home when we read the Odyssey.

The Oresteia – An
Introduction

The Oresteia is a cycle of three plays, written by the
playwright Aeschylus, about Orestes, the son of
Agamemnon. All Greek tragedies were written in
trilogies, but this is the only example of a trilogy that
still exists. The Oresteia was produced at the Greater
Dionysia Festival in 458 BC, where it won first prize.
THE AGAMEMNON
The first play in the trilogy is called the Agamemnon,
and it centers around Agamemnon’s homecoming from
the Trojan War and his subsequent death at the hands
of his wife. In it, Agamemnon has been gone for ten
years, and all that time his wife, Clytemnestra, has been
angrily plotting her revenge on her husband for
sacrificing their daughter, Iphigenia [see Agamemnon
and Iphigenia]. Clytemnestra has taken a lover,
Agamemnon’s cousin Aegisthus, who also wants
revenge on Agamemnon. Clytemnestra has sent her
ten-year-old son, Orestes, away so he will not get
160

THE ORESTEIA – AN INTRODUCTION

161

involved in the intra-familial feud. Aeschylus makes
several changes to the story of Agamemnon’s death
from the way that it is told in the Odyssey. In the
Agamemnon, it is Clytemnestra, not Aegisthus, who kills
her husband.
THE LIBATION BEARERS
The next play in the cycle is called The Libation Bearers,
and it takes place seven or eight years after the death of
Agamemnon. Orestes, Agamemnon’s son, now around
eighteen, comes back to Mycenae with his cousin,
Pylades. Apollo had instructed Orestes to avenge his
father’s murder by killing both Clytemnestra and
Aegisthus. Orestes has no trouble killing Aegisthus, but
it is extremely difficult for him to kill his own mother.
Only after Pylades reminds Orestes of Apollo’s
command is Orestes finally able to kill Clytemnestra.
Agamemnon’s murder has now been avenged, but the
fact that Orestes has killed his mother creates a further
problem. The Erinyes are female monsters who punish
murderers, especially those who have murdered
members of their own family. (The Erinyes, known as
the Furies in Latin, are depicted as ugly women with
snakes for hair. They are thought to have originated
from the curses of the person who has been killed.)
So now that Orestes has killed his mother, the Erinyes
pursue Orestes and start to drive him mad.

162

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Orestes and Pylades kill Clytemnestra and Aegisthus on a
cinerary (funerary) urn in the Museo Archeologico Regionale
Antonino Salinas in Palermo, Italy

THE EUMENIDES
The final play in the trilogy is The Eumenides, a play
that also serves as a foundation myth for the Athenian
court system. It opens with Orestes, still pursued by
the Erinyes, fleeing to Delphi to appeal to Apollo for
help, since Apollo sent him to kill his mother in the first
place. Apollo cannot send the Erinyes away, but he does
make them fall asleep so Hermes can escort Orestes to
Athens.

THE ORESTEIA – AN INTRODUCTION

163

Apollo purifying Orestes while the Erinyes sleep nearby with the
ghost of Clytemnestra trying to awaken them, found on a krater
in the Louvre

Once in Athens, Orestes appeals to Athena for help,
and Athena organizes a trial for Orestes. The goddess
presides over the trial with twelve Athenian citizens
acting as jury; this is the mythical origin of the jury
trial. The vote splits down the middle; six jurors find
Orestes innocent and six find him guilty. It is up to
Athena to cast the deciding vote, and she votes in favor
of Orestes. This is the mythical origin of the Athenian
custom that a tied vote is always decided in favor of the
defendant. But the Erinyes do not accept the verdict;
they still want to punish Orestes for the murder of his

164

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

mother. Athena convinces the Erinyes to have mercy on
Orestes; they also agree to change their name to the
Eumenides (meaning “The Kindly Ones”) in return for
receiving perpetual honor in Athens.

Origins

THE FIRST GENERATION OF GODS
There are several different versions of how the world
began in Classical mythology, but the version most
recognized is found in Hesiod’s Theogony (theomeaning “god” and -gony meaning “origin/birth”).
Hesiod says that the first being to exist was Chaos, a
dark and murky void who becomes the progenitor of
the gloomy and negative aspects of the universe, such
as Nyx (Night), Thanatos (Death), and the Moerae (the
Fates; sometimes, however, the Fates are said to be
the daughters of Zeus and Themis). Next came Gaia
(Earth, sometimes called Gē), Tartarus (the lowest part
of the Underworld), and Eros (Erotic Love). Gaia alone
gave birth to Uranus (Ouranos or Οὐρανός, meaning
“sky/heavens”), Urea (Ourea, or Mountains), and Pontus
(Sea). Now that Eros existed, future births could
proceed with the aid of erotic love. Gaia and Uranus
married and had three sets of children: the twelve
Titans (including Cronus and Rhea), the three Cyclopes
(meaning “circle-eyed,” because each one had only one
big eye in the middle of his forehead), and the three
165

166

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Hundred-Handers (so named because each one had a
hundred hands; they also had fifty heads).
THE SECOND GENERATION OF GODS: THE
TITANS

The Mutilation of Uranus by Saturn by Cristofano Gherardi in the
Palazzo Vecchio in Florence

Uranus disliked his children, particularly the monstrous
Cyclopes and Hundred-Handers, so he prevented them
from being born by blocking up Gaia’s many wombs
(caves). This was painful for Gaia and she became angry
at her husband; she also wanted her children to see
the light of day. She asked her children to help her
overthrow their father and one, the Titan Cronus,
volunteered. Gaia made a sickle out of adamant (a
mythical metal that was extremely hard) and gave it
to her son, telling him to lie in wait for his father. In
the evening, Uranus came down from the sky to sleep
with his wife, and Cronus used the opportunity to cut
off his father’s genitals. He threw the genitals into the
sea, and the goddess Aphrodite was born from the
mixture of semen and sea-foam that formed around
them [see Aphrodite]. As they fell, some bloody drops

ORIGINS

167

dripped onto the ground, impregnating Gaia with the
Erinyes (known as the Furies in Latin) and the Gigantes,
or Giants.

The sickle was used for harvesting grain.

Cronus replaced his father as ruler of the universe,
and soon his subordinates were chafing under his rule.
He imprisoned his brothers, the Cyclopes and the
Hundred-Handers, in Tartarus, the deepest and darkest
place in the universe. Gaia and Uranus, who, now
without his genitals, was able to live in peace with his
progeny, warned Cronus that one of his children was
destined to overthrow him. Cronus, hoping to avoid this
fate, swallowed each of his children (Hestia, Demeter,
Hera, Hades, and Poseidon) in turn as soon as his wife
and sister, Rhea, gave birth to them. Rhea was upset
that she was not able to spend time with her children,
so when she became pregnant with another child, she
made a plan with the help of her parents, Gaia and
Uranus. When Rhea gave birth to her youngest child,

168

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Zeus, she replaced the infant with a stone wrapped in
swaddling clothes and gave it to Cronus to swallow.
Meanwhile Gaia hid Zeus in a cave on Crete [see Creta
on map]. Zeus stayed there for a year, suckled by the
goat Amalthea, until he was mature enough to confront
his father (the gods grow up quickly). On the advice of
Gaia, Zeus gave his father an emetic which caused him
to regurgitate his other children. Cronus also vomited
up the stone he had swallowed, and Zeus placed it in
Delphi, where it became the navel stone of the earth.
Together, the sons and daughters began a war against
their father, which is referred to as Titanomachy, or the
Battle of the Gods and the Titans.

ORIGINS

The Omphalos, or the navel stone of the earth, in the
Archaeological Museum of Delphi

169

170

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

THE BATTLE OF THE GODS AND THE TITANS
The Battle of the Gods and the Titans lasted for ten
years, and for a long time both sides were evenly
matched. But eventually Zeus turned the tide of battle
to his advantage by releasing his uncles, the Cyclopes
and the Hundred-Handers, from Tartarus. The Cyclopes
forged the thunderbolts (what we would call lightning
bolts) for Zeus and the Hundred-handers threw huge
rocks from their three hundred hands. The sea roared
and the whole earth shook with the battle, and the sky
echoed in response. Zeus threw so many thunderbolts
that the whole world caught on fire, and finally the
Titans were defeated.

ORIGINS

171

Atlas with the Farnese Globe in the Naples Archaeological
Museum

After Zeus finally won, he threw the Titans into Tartarus
except for Atlas, who was the son of the Titan Iapetus.
Atlas was ordered to hold up the sky so it did not fall
onto the earth. Atlas’ brothers, Prometheus

172

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

(Forethought) and Epimetheus (Afterthought), had
fought on Zeus’ side, so they were not punished. The
Cyclopes became Zeus’ personal team of metallurgists;
they were the ones who forged his thunderbolts. The
Hundred-Handers were given the task of guarding the
gates to Tartarus.

ORIGINS

The sculpture of Atlas at Rockefeller Center

173

174

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

THE THIRD GENERATION OF GODS: THE
OLYMPIANS
The three sons of Cronus divided the universe into
three kingdoms, one for each to rule, and drew lots to
determine who would rule which part. Zeus became the
Ruler of the Heavens and King of the Gods, Poseidon
held dominion over the seas and waterways, and Hades
ruled the Underworld as King of the Dead. Gaia became
angry with the Olympians for their treatment of her
children, the Titans, so she joined with Tartarus and
bore Typhoeus (sometimes called Typhon), a monster
described differently by each author, though Hesiod
describes him as having a hundred dragon heads
growing from his shoulders. Typhoeus breathed fire
from his dragon heads and caused the entire world to
shake; he wanted to take power in Zeus’ place. Zeus
came down from Olympus to meet the monster head
on, beating him down and hurling many thunderbolts
at him. Once again, the earth, sea, and sky were
engulfed in flames and the entire world was shaken.
Zeus finally defeated the monster and threw him into
Tartarus, where he became the source of typhoon
winds. Some authors say that he was buried under Mt.
Etna, in Sicily, where he became a volcano.
ANALYSIS
The story of how Zeus came to rule over gods and men
is certainly a violent one, and it has several important
themes. One theme is the establishment of the rule of
the Olympian gods (who sometimes symbolize justice,

ORIGINS

175

law, and order) over the Titans (who sometimes
symbolize brute force) and the Gaia-Uranus generation
(who symbolize the unbridled forces of nature). This
theme is sometimes referred to as “from chaos to
cosmos,” since cosmos (kosmos, κοσμός) means “the
ordered universe” in Greek. Another more troubling
theme is the conflict between the generations, as each
father tries to suppress the rule of his sons.

Orpheus

Hermes taking Eurydice back to the Underworld on a relief in the
Naples Archaeological Museum
176

ORPHEUS

177

Orpheus, said to be the son of Apollo and Calliope, lived
in Thrace in Northwest Greece, and was the best lyre
player in the world. Some say that Apollo was the one
who taught him to play. Orpheus played and sang so
beautifully that he enchanted everyone who heard him.
Even animals stopped to listen to him, and stones and
trees moved closer to hear him sing.
Orpheus fell in love with a beautiful nymph (or nature
spirit) named Eurydice, and he won her heart by his
singing. They were married in an open-air ceremony
on a hillside. In the late afternoon after the wedding,
a former admirer of Eurydice’s began to pursue her.
She became frightened and ran away without looking
where she was going. In her fright, she stepped on
a snake, which bit her. The snake turned out to be
poisonous, and Eurydice died almost immediately.
Orpheus grieved constantly for Eurydice. He would sit
and sing songs of mourning all day every day and weep
as he sang. The animals and even the trees and grasses
tried to comfort him, but it was no use. Every reason for
living seemed to have gone away when Eurydice died.
At last Orpheus decided to go into Hades and try to find
her.
Orpheus found the cave that led to Hades and slowly
descended into the Underworld. He sang to Cerberus
and charmed him until the three-headed dog allowed
him to enter. Orpheus played for Hades and
Persephone and sang them a song about the beginning
of the world and the origin of gods and men. Then he
sang about the joys of love and the sadness that comes
with love’s loss. Orpheus’ singing charmed even the
hearts of Hades and Persephone, rulers of the dead.

178

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

They allowed him to bring his dear Eurydice back to life
on one condition: he could not turn back and look at
her until they reached the upper world.
Orpheus agreed and turned to go, hoping that
Eurydice was following him. But the journey to the
upper world was long and difficult, and Orpheus
desperately longed to see if Eurydice was really behind
him. Orpheus resisted this impulse until the opening
of the cave was in sight, just ahead; then he could no
longer resist. Orpheus turned back, just for an instant,
to see if Eurydice was really there. But that instant was
his undoing. As he looked back, he saw Hermes leading
her back down to Hades, even as she stretched out her
arms to him in her heart-aching sorrow.
Orpheus was inconsolable over his loss of Eurydice
for the second and final time. He sang constantly of his
love for her and refused to look at any other women.
Also, he became a devoted worshipper of Apollo, the
sun god. It was his custom to go up to the top of a
mountain every morning in order to greet the sun. This
made Dionysus very angry. Dionysus was at that time
winning the region of Thrace over to his own worship,
and he was celebrated at night with frenzied music
and dancing. Dionysus resented Orpheus and began to
complain to his Maenads about Orpheus’ neglect. The
Maenads already hated Orpheus because he refused
their advances, so one day, in a Dionysiac frenzy, they
attacked Orpheus and tore him limb from limb.
The Muses gathered up some parts of his body and
buried them, but Orpheus’ head and his lyre fell into
the River Hebros. From there they floated to the island
of Lesbos, off the coast of Asia, the head still singing as

ORPHEUS

179

it went. The Lesbians took the head and the lyre and
treated them with great respect. They dedicated the
lyre to Apollo, and it was kept for many years in Apollo’s
temple there. Some say that the Lesbians buried
Orpheus’ head nearby; others say that they kept it, too,
in Apollo’s temple, where it not only continued to sing,
but also gave oracles and prophesied the future.
After many years a religion grew up, said to have
been inspired by Orpheus. Orphic religion told of a life
after death. It hinted that the soul did not die with the
body, but went on a journey to another world. Those
who had lived good lives and had purified themselves
of all evil lived permanently in a beautiful place,
sometimes called the Elysian Fields. There the sun
always shone and the souls enjoyed an ageless and
deathless existence. Those who had lived sinful lives
remained in Hades, suffering dreadful tortures. Those
whose lives had been partly good and partly evil were
given a glimpse of the Elysian Fields, but were forced to
be reincarnated into new bodies and return to this life
once more.

Persephone

Roman name: Proserpina
Epithets: Chthonian (with mother Demeter), Kore
(maiden)
Symbols: pomegranate (fertility symbol), torch, crown
Functions: goddess of the dead and fertility

180

PERSEPHONE

181

Hades and Persephone with all their symbols on a terracotta
pinax in the Cleveland Museum of Art

Persephone was the daughter of Zeus and Demeter.
She was married to Hades, ruler of the Underworld,
who abducted her and took her as his bride. After
Demeter discovered what had happened, Demeter and

182

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Hades struck a deal. Persephone would spend two
thirds of the year with her mother, during which crops
would grow, and the rest of the year she would live
with her husband, during which the earth would die
[See Demeter]. This is a natural aetiological myth that
explains the origin of the seasons: Persephone is with
Demeter during the spring, summer, and fall, but
during the winter, when Persephone is in Hades with
her husband, it is winter on the earth and the crops do
not grow.
Persephone is always depicted as happy in her role
as Queen of the Dead despite the violent nature of her
capture, which raises some interesting questions about
how marriage was perceived in ancient Greece.
Persephone does not have a large role in myth. One
notable exception is one of the versions of the myth
of Aphrodite and Adonis. Aphrodite was smitten by the
beauty of the young and handsome Adonis and gave
him to Persephone for safe keeping, but Persephone
was also smitten. The Queen of the Dead refused to
give Adonis back, and Aphrodite went to Zeus to help
settle the quarrel. Zeus declared that the boy should
spend a third of the year with Persephone, a third with
Aphrodite, and a third as he pleased, which he chose to
spend with Aphrodite. This mirrors the deal brokered
for Persephone’s time, and similarly, Adonis became
associated with death and rebirth in the Adonia festival
[see Aphrodite].

PERSEPHONE

183

184

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Proserpine by Rossetti (1874) in the Tate Gallery of Modern Art in
London

Perseus

Perseus is the only Greek hero (that I am aware of)
who does NOT fit the Story Pattern of the Greek Hero
(see the Story Pattern of the Greek Hero). To be sure,
Perseus does fit parts of the pattern: he certainly has
an Unusual Birth, and he does go on a Heroic Journey
in which he accomplishes Heroic Tests. But Perseus
does not accomplish any Early Tests (that I know of),
and, most importantly, Perseus is the only one of all
the Greek heroes who has a happy life after he has
accomplished his heroic journey and who does NOT
have an unhappy death. I guess you could say that
Perseus is the exception that proves the rule.
I. UNUSUAL BIRTH
Acrisius, the king of Argos [see map], had a daughter,
but no sons, so he consulted the Delphic Oracle to
see how he could get an heir to the throne. But the
oracle he received made him forget the reason why he
had consulted the Oracle in the first place. The Delphic
Oracle said: “Your daughter’s son will kill you.”

185

186

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Danaë by Correggio (1530) in the Galleria Borghese in Rome

Of course, Acrisius wanted to do everything he could to
prevent this. So he put his daughter, Danaë, in a bronze
prison, and he would not let any man near her. But
Zeus fell in love with her, and he visited her in the form
of a shower of golden rain. Nine months later, Danaë
gave birth to Perseus.

PERSEUS

187

Danaë and Zeus disguised as a shower of gold on a krater in the
Louvre

Acrisius put them both in a wooden chest and put them
out to sea. But the chest floated safely to the island
of Seriphos, where it was found by Dictys, the brother
of the king. Dictys took both mother and child into his
home, and treated them like members of his family.
Perseus received a good upbringing in Dictys’ care.
All went well for many years, until Polydectes, Dictys’
brother and the king of Seriphos, fell in love with Danaë
and wanted to marry her. Danaë refused, and Perseus,
who was now a young man, defended his mother, so
Polydectes decided to find a way to get rid of Perseus.

188

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

II. EARLY TESTS
Apparently none.
III. & IV. HEROIC JOURNEY & TESTS
1. Polydectes told everyone that he was planning to
marry Hippodameia, the daughter of the wealthy King
Oinomaos of Pisa, and he asked all the men in his
kingdom to contribute something toward the
substantial bride price that he would have to pay. When
asked for a contribution, Perseus said (a bit
dramatically) that he would begrudge Polydectes
nothing, and that he would even give him the Gorgon’s
head. But Polydectes held the youth to his promise.
So Perseus set out to retrieve the head of the Gorgon,
Medusa. Of course, Polydectes had no intention of
marrying Hippodameia, and he was well aware of the
problematic nature of Perseus’ quest.
There were actually three Gorgon sisters, but the
other two Gorgons were immortal. Since Medusa was
the only Gorgon who was capable of being killed, it was
her head that Perseus was going to seek. But there
was one, huge problem: anyone who looked at Medusa
would instantly be turned into stone. So how could
anyone kill her without dying before he could complete
the mission? Fortunately for Perseus, however, Athena
already hated Medusa (for the reason why, see
Poseidon), so Athena decided to help Perseus kill her.

PERSEUS

189

Perseus killing Medusa and Pegasus being born from her head
on a lekythos in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York
City

First, Athena helped Perseus find the Graeae. The
Graeae were three old sisters who shared a single eye
between them. The Graeae did not want to help

190

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Perseus, but he managed to steal their eye as they were
passing it from one to another; Perseus refused to give
back the eye until they helped him, so they agreed. The
Graeae told Perseus about some nymphs and where
to find them. And when Perseus found the nymphs,
they gave him three important gifts: winged sandals,
which would allow him to fly through the air, a cap
of darkness, which would make him invisible, and a
special metallic pouch for Medusa’s head.

PERSEUS

191

Perseus by Cellini (1554) found under the Loggia dei Lanzi in
Florence

Athena also told Perseus not to look at Medusa directly

192

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

while killing her with his sword, but to look at Medusa’s
reflection in his shield to avoid being turned into stone.
Perseus was able to avoid the two immortal Gorgons
because he was wearing the cap of invisibility; he flew
down to the Gorgons without being seen, and, looking
carefully at his shield, he cut off Medusa’s head and
placed it in his pouch. Much later (after his adventures
were over) Perseus gave Medusa’s head to Athena, and
Athena put it on the aegis (or, in some versions, on her
shield).

PERSEUS

193

Perseus with the Head of Medusa by Antonio Canova from
1804–1806, found in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New
York City

2. As Perseus was flying home on his winged sandals,
Perseus passed by Ethiopia (or in some versions,
Phoenicia) and saw a beautiful girl, Andromeda, who

194

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

was the princess of the land, chained to a rocky cliff
and about to be devoured by a sea serpent. Perseus
immediately fell in love with her. Using his sword and
winged sandals, Perseus killed the sea serpent (in some
versions, he turns the monster to stone by showing
it Medusa’s head). And, of course, he marries
Andromeda.

Perseus rescuing Andromeda from the sea serpent on an
amphora found in the Altes Museum in Berlin

V. HAPPY LATER LIFE
Unlike the other Greek heroes, Perseus does not have
an unhappy later life and a terrible death. On the
contrary, Perseus seems to be the only Greek hero who
lives happily ever after.

PERSEUS

195

Perseus returned to Seriphus, where he found that
Polydectes was about to marry his mother, although
she still did not want to go through with the marriage.
As he entered the hall where Polydectes and his friends
were having a feast to celebrate his upcoming
marriage, Perseus pulled Medusa’s head out of its bag,
turning the king and all his friends into stone. Perseus
now had no more use for Medusa’s head, so he
gratefully gave it to Athena, and he sailed home to
Argos with Andromeda and Danaë.
Acrisius received them kindly, and Perseus did not
resent his grandfather for all the trouble he had caused
him and his mother. But not long afterward, when he
was competing at an athletic contest, Perseus threw a
discus and accidentally hit Acrisius, killing him instantly.
He did not feel comfortable ruling his grandfather’s
kingdom, after having killed him, so he and Andromeda
moved away, and Perseus founded the kingdom of
Mycenae. And Perseus and Andromeda lived happily
ever after!

Poseidon

Roman name: Neptune
Epithets: Enosichthon (Earth-Shaker), Hippios (the
Horse God)
Symbols: trident, horse, bull
Functions: god of the sea, salt and fresh water
springs, earthquakes, and horses
POSEIDON’S BIRTH MYTH
Poseidon was the son of Cronus and Rhea. Most stories
relate that he was swallowed by his father like all his
older siblings [see Origins] and was rescued by Zeus
along with his other siblings. After the Olympians
overthrew their Titan parents, the three Olympian
brothers, Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon, drew lots to divvy
up the realms. Poseidon was allotted domain over the
seas, but he always remained immensely jealous of
Zeus’ position of King of the Gods. He once convinced
Hera and Athena to join him in a rebellion against Zeus,
whom they managed to imprison in chains until Thetis
brought Briareüs, the chief of the Hundred-Handers, to
release him (Homer, Iliad, 1.396-405).
196

POSEIDON

197

POSEIDON’S PATRONAGE
The gods often competed with each other to win
patronage over areas in Greece. Poseidon vied with
several of his fellow gods for several areas, and
Poseidon did not often fare well in these contests. He
and Helius (god of the sun) both wanted Corinth [see
Corinthus on map] and could not agree, so they took
their dispute to Briareüs, who divided the area between
the two, giving the citadel to Helius and the isthmus
to Poseidon. Hera and Poseidon fought passionately
over Argos [map], and when the three river gods who
were given the task of judging the dispute were found
in favor of Hera, Poseidon flooded the city and dried
up the rivers in anger. Athena and Poseidon argued
over possession of Troezen, and Zeus ruled that they
would share possession of the city. The most famous
of Poseidon’s contests for power was over Athens [see
Athenae on map], where he competed unsuccessfully
with Athena [see Athena].

198

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Athena and Poseidon competing for patronage of Athens on an
amphora in the Cabinet des Médailles in Paris

FAMILY LIFE
Poseidon was married to Amphitrite, a daughter of
Oceanus and Tethys, and they had a few children, most
notably Triton, but like his brother Zeus, Poseidon had
a tendency to pursue extramarital affairs. The cyclops

POSEIDON

199

Polyphemus (who figures in the Odyssey) was his son
by the sea nymph, Thoösa, and he fathered the hunter
Orion [see Artemis] with Euryale, the daughter of
Minos. Poseidon seduced Tyro (the mother of Aeson
and the grandmother of the hero, Jason) in the form
of a river and became the father of Pelias [see Jason]
and Neleus, who, in turn, became the father of Nestor
(who figures in both the Iliad and the Odyssey). Theseus
was also a son of Poseidon [see Theseus]. Unlike Hera
[see Hera], Amphitrite does not seem to have cared
much that her husband often looked for love outside
of marriage. In fact, in one version of Theseus’ journey
to Crete [see Theseus], when Theseus arrived in Crete,
Minos questioned his paternity, and Theseus
questioned Minos’. So, each one had to prove to the
other that he was the son of a god. Minos prayed to
his father Zeus for a sign and received thunder and
lightning. Theseus jumped into the sea and Amphitrite
gave him her tiara to prove his connection to her
husband.
POSEIDON’S AFFAIRS
It seems strange that a sea god should be connected
to horses, but Poseidon has several myths establishing
him as a god of horses. While Demeter was wandering
the earth looking for Persephone [see Demeter],
Poseidon decided to pursue her. Demeter, trying to
avoid her brother, turned into a mare, but Poseidon
responded by turning into a stallion and having his
way with her anyway. The product of this union was
the divine horse, Arion. On another occasion, Poseidon

200

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

seduced the gorgeous maiden, Medusa, in one of
Athena’s temples. Naturally, the virgin goddess was
enraged that her temple was so defiled. Athena
retaliated by transforming Medusa into a hideous
monster with snakes for hair who would turn anyone
who looked at her into stone. Later, when Perseus cut
off Medusa’s head, the winged horse Pegasus sprang
out from her neck, the product of Medusa and
Poseidon’s tryst. Pegasus was later tamed by another
of Poseidon’s sons, Bellerophon. Peleus, the father of
Achilles, was given the immortal horses, Xanthus and
Balius, at his wedding by Poseidon. The god was also
a friend to the centaurs and helped hide them from
Heracles when he waged war on them [see 12 Labors
of Heracles].

POSEIDON

201

Caravaggio’s Medusa (1597) in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence

POSEIDON’S ROLE IN THE TROJAN WAR
During the Trojan War, Poseidon sided with the Greeks
at least in part because he was still angry with Troy
for the treatment he had received at the hands of
Laomedon, the father of King Priam. Apollo and
Poseidon were contracted by Laomedon to build walls
around the city. The two gods agreed to perform this
manual labor either because they wanted to test him
or because Zeus had decreed, as punishment for a

202

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

rebellion of which they had both been a part, that they
work for Laomedon for a year. In any case, at the end
of the year Laomedon would not pay them and even
threatened to sell them as slaves. Apollo responded by
sending a plague, and Poseidon sent a sea monster
to terrorize them. Apollo, apparently, did not hold a
grudge, since he always favored the Trojans, but
Poseidon sided with the Greeks in the Trojan War.
Despite favoring the Greeks, however, Poseidon, like
Athena, was quickly angered by the less-than-perfect
behavior of the victorious Greeks. Poseidon helped
Athena punish the Lesser Ajax for his rape of Cassandra
during the sack of Troy [see Athena], and he kept
Odysseus from his home for ten years to punish the
hero for blinding his son Polyphemus.
POSEIDON, KING MINOS, AND THE MINOTAUR
To read about this myth, see the Minotaur.

POSEIDON

203

The temple to Poseidon at Sounion

POSEIDON’S HISTORY
Poseidon seems to be a merging of the Mycenaean
god, Poseidaon (meaning “husband of Da”, as πόσις/
posis = husband), who may have been the consort of
Demeter, and one or more pre-Greek sea gods. Since
the Mycenaeans migrated into Greece from central
Europe, they had no sea gods and thus had to adapt
some of their gods to new functions.

204

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The cape at Sounion

Prometheus

Prometheus (Forethought) was the son of the Titan
Iapetus and was brother to the Titans Epimetheus
(Afterthought) and Atlas. Prometheus and Epimetheus
sided with Zeus and the other Olympians against the
Titans and their brother and father because
Prometheus could foresee the outcome of the conflict.
Because of this, Prometheus and Epimetheus did not
suffer the same fate as Iapetus and Atlas.
Prometheus was considered the father of mankind
because he created them from clay. He made only
men—no women—and let them loose to live in the
world. The world was not a kind place, though, as it
was filled with beasts and getting enough food to stay
alive was a difficult task. This was not made any easier
by Zeus, who insisted that mortal men sacrifice to the
gods frequently and give the entire animal to the gods.
Prometheus appealed to Zeus to allow the mortals to
give only a portion of the animal to the gods and to
keep the rest for themselves. Zeus agreed, but the two
could not agree on which parts would be reserved for
the gods. Prometheus knew that Zeus wanted all the
good parts of the animal and came up with a plan to
trick him. Prometheus took an animal and divided the
205

206

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

choice cuts of the meat from the bones and other less
savory tissues. On the pile of bones he placed fat and
a small portion of nice meat on top to disguise it, but
on the pile of good meat he placed some lesser meat
and gristle. He had Zeus choose from the two piles,
and Zeus chose the bones and fat. Zeus was very angry
when he found out, and he never forgave Prometheus
for tricking him.
Men now had meat, but they still had difficulty
surviving because they could not keep warm or cook
their food. Prometheus knew that fire would save them,
but Zeus kept fire for the gods alone. So again,
Prometheus thought up a plan. He took a red-hot coal
and hid it inside a woody fennel stalk to give to mortals.
Now the mortals could cook and keep warm and they
were much happier; they worshipped Prometheus as
the inventor of all the arts of civilization. But when Zeus
saw mankind using fire, he became furious at having
been tricked once again. He ordered that Prometheus
be nailed to a lonely spot in the Caucasus Mountains.
Every day an eagle would come to peck out his liver, but
every night Prometheus’ liver would grow back so the
eagle could eat it again. But Zeus was not finished with
his punishments; now he wanted to punish mankind.
Zeus then had Hephaestus build a beautiful woman,
named Pandora (All Gifts) because each of the gods
had given her a gift, and he sent her to Epimetheus.
Even though Prometheus had warned his brother not
to accept any gift from the gods, Epimetheus (true to his
name) forgot all about his brother’s warning. As soon as
Epimetheus saw Pandora, he knew he had to have her
for his wife. But Pandora brought with her a jar (not a

PROMETHEUS

207

box) that was filled with evils. And once she opened her
jar, all the evils flew out into the world; only hope stayed
behind as a comfort for mankind.
Prometheus remained chained to the mountains
until Heracles shot the eagle with his arrow and set the
Titan free while on his labor to bring back the Apples
of the Hesperides [see the 12 Labors of Heracles]. Zeus
allowed Heracles to free Prometheus because he held
some very useful knowledge that he would only divulge
once he had been freed. After he was freed,
Prometheus informed Zeus that the goddess Thetis,
with whom Zeus was infatuated, was fated to give birth
to a son who would be greater than his father [see
Intro to Iliad]. Before Zeus knew this prophecy, he and
Poseidon had been rivals for Thetis’ hand, but once
the prophecy was known, neither god wanted anything
to do with her. Zeus and Poseidon agreed that Thetis
should be safely married off to a mortal. And that is
how Thetis, a sea-goddess, came to marry Peleus, who
was only a mortal. For the story of their wedding and
the identity of the son (who did turn out to be greater
than his father), see the Introduction to the Iliad.

Sphinx

The Greek sphinx was clearly inspired by the Egyptian
sphinx, but the Greeks modified it and made it their
own. The Greek sphinx had a woman’s face and breasts,
a lion’s body, and a bird’s wings. The word sphinx is
Greek (σφίγξ), and it means “strangler,” perhaps
stemming from the fact that lionesses usually kill their
prey by strangling it.
Since sphinxes were very intimidating, the Greeks
frequently put them on gravestones, to frighten away
would-be grave robbers. This use is called
“apotropaic”—meaning “causing someone to turn
away.” Most of the examples of ancient Greek sphinxes
that we have today are from ancient gravestones.

208

SPHINX

209

A Sphinx statue from a grave stele found in the Archaeological
Museum in Corinth

In myth, there was one famous Sphinx, who turned up
in Thebes shortly after its king, Laius, had been killed
while on his way to consult the Delphic Oracle. This
Sphinx flew on top of the city walls, and asked all the

210

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Theban youths a riddle. When they could not answer
it, she ate them! At the time, Creon was the regent in
Thebes (since Laius had died), and he was so desperate
to get rid of the Sphinx that he promised the kingship
and the hand of the widowed Queen Jocasta (who also
happened to be his sister) in marriage to anyone who
could solve the Sphinx’s riddle. This was the Sphinx’s
riddle: “What goes on four feet in the morning, two feet
in midday, and three feet in the evening?”

Oedipus answering the Sphinx’s riddle on a kylix found in the
Vatican Museum

At around this time Oedipus came to Thebes (since he
didn’t want to go back home to Corinth), and he solved
the riddle. Oedipus said, “The answer is ‘man’. A man
crawls on all fours in the morning of his life, he walks
on two feet in the midday of his life, and he uses a cane
for extra support when he is old.” The sphinx was so

SPHINX

211

upset that Oedipus had answered the riddle correctly,
that she threw herself down from the walls of Thebes
and died.

212

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

SPHINX

213

Oedipus and the Sphinx by Gustave Moreau (1864) in the
Metropolian Museum in New York

So Oedipus was welcomed to Thebes as a hero. He
married Queen Jocasta and became the King of Thebes.
Oedipus and Jocasta had four children: Eteocles,
Polynices, Ismene, and Antigone.

Story Pattern of the Greek
Hero

Myths from many lands illustrate the archetypal
pattern of the hero, in which a hero’s life follows a
predictable pattern of types of events. These include an
unusual birth, early tests, a heroic quest (with heroic
tests), and a return and a reward. This pattern is drawn
from the work of the comparative mythologist Joseph
Campbell. Campbell discovered that the story of a
typical hero follows a predictable pattern across the
mythologies of many different cultures.
Campbell’s Story Pattern of the Hero applies to the
Greek hero to some extent, but Greek heroes differ
in one, crucial respect: the last stage. Greek heroes,
contrary to heroes from other cultures, usually have an
unhappy later life and a violent or unhappy death.
In setting forth our own Story Pattern of the Greek
Hero, we will concentrate especially on the heroes’
unhappy later lives (after they have completed their
heroic journeys) and their unhappy deaths because
they differentiate Greek myths from the myths of most
other cultures.
214

STORY PATTERN OF THE GREEK HERO

215

STORY PATTERN OF THE GREEK HERO
I. Unusual Birth – usually has one divine parent &
one mortal parent
• sometimes the god (if Zeus) changes his shape
• sometimes there is both a divine and a human
father (both slept with the mother on same
night)
II. Early Tests – must prove heroic nature while still
young
III. Heroic Journey – motivated by a noble cause
• often because his family has been deprived of
rightful power
• often imposed by a wicked king
• often includes a descent to Hades & return
• in psychological terms this often means facing
his own death
IV. Heroic Tests
• must pass series of difficult tests; often part of
heroic journey
• includes performing difficult and dangerous
acts that greatly benefit his people

216

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

• sometimes imposed by a wicked king
• sometimes includes killing a monster or
dragon
• often wins princess bride as a reward
V. Unhappy Later Life and Violent or Unhappy
Death
• this aspect is peculiarly Greek
• different from heroes of other cultures, e.g.
our own
Note: variations are important
• most heroes don’t follow the pattern fully
• it is interesting to note that each Greek hero is
unique and not all of them fit into every
aspect of this general pattern
• but all Greek heroes (except, perhaps, for
Perseus) do have an unhappy later life and
violent or unhappy death
• Heracles is perhaps the best example of this
pattern

Theseus

Functions: hero and king of Athens
THE BIRTH OF THESEUS
Theseus was either the son of Poseidon and Aëthra,
the daughter of King Pittheus of Troezen, or the son of
Aëthra and Aegeus, the king of Athens [see Athenae on
map]. Apparently both Aegeus and Poseidon slept with
Aëthra on the same night.
Aegeus, the king of Athens, was having trouble
producing an heir, so he went to the Delphic Oracle
[map] to ask how he could solve his problem. The
Pythia said: “Do not open the foot of the wineskin until
you return home.” The meaning of this oracle, as was
often the case, was unclear. On his way home to
Athens, Aegeus stopped at Troezen to ask his friend,
Pittheus, who was known for his wisdom, what the
oracle meant. In ancient Greece, wineskins were made
from a whole skin of a goat; one foot of the goatskin
was used for the spout. So when the Pythia said, “Don’t
open the foot of the wineskin,” she was literally saying,
“Don’t uncork the wine.” But the foot of the wineskin
217

218

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

was also very long and straight, so it was also a phallic
symbol. And that is what the Pythia meant; she meant
to advise Aegeus not to sleep with any woman until
he returned home since the next woman he slept with
would bear him a son.

A wineskin was made from the skin of a goat to hold wine. One
of the feet of the goat would be made into the opening and thus
it is called the foot. In this sculpture (found in the Naples
Museum), the wineskin is placed on top of a lion skin.

Pittheus knew the meaning immediately, but instead of
telling Aegeus what it meant, he chose to get Aegeus
drunk and have him sleep with his daughter, Aëthra.
He did this because Aegeus, as king of Athens, was
very powerful, and he wanted Aëthra’s son to become
king of Athens. However, Aegeus did not know that
Poseidon also slept with Aëthra later that same night.

THESEUS

219

THESEUS’ EARLY TESTS
The next morning, before Aegeus left Troezen to return
home to Athens, he placed a pair of sandals and a
sword under a large and heavy rock. He told Aëthra
that if she gave birth to a son, she should raise him. If
he became strong enough to remove the rock, he told
her to send the boy to him in Athens with the sword
and sandals as tokens of his parentage. If he could
not move the rock, however, she should keep him in
Troezen.
Aëthra, of course, did give gave birth to a son. She
named him Theseus, and he was so strong that he
was able to move the rock and take the tokens when
he was only sixteen. So, Theseus set out for Athens.
Now, he could have taken the easy route to Athens by
sea, but he chose the dangerous land route because
he wanted to have plenty of opportunities to perform
heroic deeds. He had heard of the great deeds of
Heracles, of course, and he wanted to show that
Heracles was not the only hero in Greece. Theseus soon
ran into Periphetes, a son of Hephaestus who was
known by the name Corynetes, which means “clubbearer,” because he carried around a large bronze club
which he used to cave in the skull of anyone who
passed by him. Theseus could not defeat him with
brute strength, but he was clever and quick as well as
strong, so he managed to maneuver around Periphetes
and take away his club. Once Theseus had the club,
it was not difficult to overpower and kill Periphetes.
Having done so, Theseus continued on his journey.
Next Theseus ran into the thief Sinis, who had earned

220

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

the name Pityocamptes, meaning “pine-bender,”
because of his habit of bending down two separate
trees and tying men’s limbs to them. After that, he
would let the trees go, causing the man’s body to tear
apart. Theseus did the same to Sinis. He then decided
to go a little out of his way to kill the Crommyonian Sow.
He dispatched her easily and returned to his journey,
stopping next at the Sceironian Rocks, named for the
thief who lived at the top, Sceiron. This thief would
terrorize travelers by forcing them to wash his feet and,
while they were doing that, kicking them off the cliffs
to a giant turtle living below them which would eat the
travelers. Theseus defeated Sceiron by taking a hold of
the thief by the legs before he could kick and throwing
him over the edge.
The last two major deeds Theseus accomplished
along the way happened just outside Athens. First, he
met the king of Eleusis, Cercyon, who would challenge
anyone who passed by to a boxing match and kill his
opponent. Theseus overpowered him with his speed
and killed Cercyon. Then, in a nearby town, he ran into
a man named Damastes, who had earned the name
Procrustes, which means “stretcher,” because he would
invite travelers to stay the night, but when they did
not fit the bed he provided, he would cut down those
who were too large and stretch out those who were
too small. Again, Theseus treated his foe to the same
punishment he dealt out to his victims. And even today
people use the term “Procrustean bed” to describe a
theory that has been artificially made to fit the facts
(because the facts have been altered).

THESEUS

221

THESEUS AND MEDEA
Finally, Theseus arrived in Athens and went to the
palace of Aegeus. Tales of his deeds on his journey
had arrived before he did. Aegeus was impressed and
invited the young hero to feast with him. Because of
the rules of xenia [see Xenia], Theseus had not yet
introduced himself, and this allowed Aegeus’ wife,
Medea, to act. Medea was a witch, and by this time
(sixteen years after Aegeus had consulted the oracle)
she had married Aegeus and had born him a son,
Medon. [For the background on how Medea came to
Athens to be Aegeus’ wife, see Jason.] Medea
recognized Theseus immediately and knew that if
Aegeus discovered the hero’s identity, her son would
not be able to inherit the throne.
Medea convinced Aegeus that the hero would side
with Aegeus’ brother Pallas, who had been trying to
take the throne away from Aegeus for years. She
suggested that Aegeus put poison in Theseus’ wine,
and the King, who was easily fooled, agreed to do this.
But when the unsuspecting Theseus raised his hand
to drink his wine, Aegeus recognized his own sword
hooked to Theseus’ belt. In a panic, he dashed Theseus’
wine cup to the ground just as Theseus was about to
drink it. Needless to say, Medea and Medon were
banished from Athens.
THESEUS, ARIADNE, AND THE MINOTAUR
Not long after Theseus was publicly recognized as
Aegeus’ son, it was time for Athens to send seven

222

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

youths and seven maidens to Crete to be fed to the
Minotaur [see Minotaur]. The Athenians had to do this
every nine years to atone for a previous crime. When
Theseus heard about this, he was appalled that
Athens—a great and powerful city—was so subservient
to King Minos of Crete. So Theseus volunteered to be
one of the youths taken. Theseus vowed to kill the
Minotaur, bring back all the Athenian youths and
maidens alive, and free Athens from such a terrible
burden. Aegeus was distraught; he had finally found
the son he had longed for, and now the boy was about
to be taken away again. But he finally agreed to let his
son go because Theseus was doing it for such a noble
cause. But Aegeus asked only one thing. He put black
sails on Theseus’ ship as it set out for Crete, and he
requested that the Athenian ship’s sails should remain
black if Theseus died in the attempt against the
Minotaur, but he asked Theseus to switch the sails to
white if he survived. Theseus agreed, and they all sailed
to Crete.
When the Athenians arrived on Crete, there was a
public parade of the prisoners, and as soon as Ariadne,
Minos’ daughter, saw Theseus, she immediately fell in
love with him. Now the Minotaur was a monster, halfman and half-bull, who lived in the labyrinth [See
Minotaur]. Ariadne knew that Theseus would need her
help to kill the Minotaur and then escape from the
labyrinth. So, she secretly visited Theseus in prison the
night before the Athenians were going to be fed to
the Minotaur, giving him a sword and a ball of thread.
She told him to tie the thread to the entrance of the
labyrinth, and, after he had killed the Minotaur, he

THESEUS

223

could use the thread to find his way out again. Ariadne
asked only one thing of Theseus: after he had killed the
Minotaur and escaped from the labyrinth, he should
take her back to Athens with him to be his bride.
Theseus agreed.
Theseus took the ball of thread and the sword into
the labyrinth, unwinding the string as he went. When
he found the Minotaur, he cut his throat and then led
the Athenian youths and maidens out of the labyrinth,
following the trail of Ariadne’s thread. He then picked
up Ariadne, who was waiting by the Athenian ship, and
they quickly sailed away. Minos’ fleet could not pursue
them because Ariadne had somehow found a way to
bore holes into all their ships.

224

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

A kylix depicting Theseus dragging the Minotaur from the
labyrinth, located in the British Museum

On the way back to Athens, the group stopped on the
island of Dia (modern day Naxos) [map]. Theseus and
Ariadne slept together on the island that night, but
Theseus woke up around midnight. He had already
escaped the labyrinth, so he no longer had any use for
Ariadne, and he felt a little embarrassed at the prospect
of marrying into a family that was a little strange in their
sexual habits. So, while Ariadne was sleeping, Theseus
quietly gathered the group of Athenians together and
left the island without her. When she awoke, she found

THESEUS

225

herself alone on a desert island. Ariadne was
devastated, of course, and she was sure she was going
to die a horrible death. But it just so happened that,
later that same day, Dionysus was passing by in the
midst of his travels to promote his worship. He saw
Ariadne and was so smitten by her beauty that he
immediately made her his wife and she became a
goddess. So, everything turned out well for Ariadne (no
thanks to Theseus). And if you travel to the island of
Naxos today, you will see a statue of Ariadne, looking
out to shore.

226

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

A modern statue of Ariadne of the island of Naxos, the island on
which she was abandoned by Theseus

Theseus, however, either because he was feeling guilty

THESEUS

227

about his treatment of Ariadne (and thus was
preoccupied) or just acting from sheer cockiness, forgot
to change the sails on his ships. So when Aegeus,
watching for the return of his ship, saw the black sails,
he was overcome with grief and threw himself into the
sea. And the part of the Mediterranean Sea that is just
off the coast of the Athenian peninsula, the Aegean Sea,
is still named after him. When Theseus came home to
Athens in triumph, he found his city in mourning for the
death of the king.
THESEUS AND HIPPOLYTE
At some point, Theseus helped the hero Heracles fight
against the Amazons and brought back with him the
Queen of the Amazons, Hippolyte, as his wife. The
Amazons were unhappy to lose their queen and sent
a force to attack Athens to regain her. The two groups
fought, and Hippolyte died in battle, but not before
bearing Theseus a son, Hippolytus.
THE STORY OF HIPPOLYTUS
Many years later, Theseus married Minos’ youngest
daughter, Phaedra, to smooth over relations with Crete.
But when he brought Phaedra back to Athens, she fell
in love with Hippolytus, who was now about 19 or 20
years old (and much closer to Phaedra in age than
Theseus was). Some say that Aphrodite had caused
Phaedra to do this because Hippolytus was a devotee of
the virgin goddess Artemis. Since Artemis was a virgin,
Hippolytus had vowed to remain a virgin as well, and

228

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Aphrodite took this as a personal affront. In any case,
Phaedra was sick with love for the handsome young
man. But despite her personal pain, she vowed never to
breath a word of her feelings. Nevertheless, Hippolytus
somehow found out. And when he found out, he was
both furious and disgusted. He confronted Phaedra
and called her a lot of terrible names (as you can
imagine). As a result, Phaedra became bitterly angry at
Hippolytus and vowed revenge. She knew she had to
commit suicide; she could not live with the shame of
wanting to commit adultery with her own stepson. But
before she killed herself, she wrote a note to Theseus,
falsely claiming that his son had raped her. Theseus
believed what he read in the note despite Hippolytus’
protestations that he had nothing to do with his
stepmother. But at this point, Theseus was in a rage.
He banished Hippolytus from Athens and called upon
his father, Poseidon, to kill the youth. As Hippolytus was
driving his chariot out of Athens along the seashore,
a terrifying bull emerged from the water. The horses
were so frightened that they all reared up and ran in
different directions. Hippolytus got tangled in the reins
of his chariot and was eventually pulled apart by his
horses. After this had happened, Artemis told Theseus
the truth.
THE DEATH OF THESEUS
Theseus now had to live with the terrible truth that he
had killed his own son, and for no good reason. He
continued on as king of Athens, but life was never the
same. He became moody and sullen, and he neglected

THESEUS

229

his duties as king. The Athenians asked him to leave,
and Theseus agreed. He decided to go to the island
of Scyrus, Aegeus’ homeland, and Lycomedes, the king
of Scyrus, agreed to give Theseus some land that had
once belonged to Aegeus. But deep down, Lycomedes
felt threatened by the presence of such a great hero.
As Theseus was walking with Lycomedes along the cliffs
at the edge of the island, somehow Theseus tripped (or
did Lycomedes push him?) and he fell to his death.

The Three Types of Myths:
Aetiological, Historical, and
Psychological

There are actually many different types of myth, not
just three. In fact, there are several entire theories of
myth. The theoretical study of myth is very complex;
many books have been written about theories of myth,
and we could have an entire class just on theories of
myth (without studying any of the myths themselves).
The problem with theories of myth, however, is that
they are not very good; they don’t do a great job of
explaining the myths or helping us understand them.
Furthermore, the myths themselves are much more
interesting than the theories. For these reasons, this
textbook will not say very much about the theories of
myth. But we don’t want to ignore the theoretical study
of myth entirely, so we will limit ourselves to discussing
only three types of myth.

230

THE THREE TYPES OF MYTHS: AETIOLOGICAL,
HISTORICAL, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL

231

1. AETIOLOGICAL MYTHS
Aetiological (sometimes spelled etiological) myths
explain the reason why something is the way it is today.
The word aetiological is from the Greek word aetion
(αἴτιον), meaning “reason” or “explanation”. Please note
that the reasons given in an aetiological myth are NOT
the real (or scientific) reasons. They are explanations
that have meaning for us as human beings. There are
three subtypes of aetiological myths: natural,
etymological, and religious.
A natural aetiological myth explains an aspect of
nature. For example, you could explain lightning and
thunder by saying that Zeus is angry.
An etymological aetiological myth explains the
origin of a word. (Etymology is the study of word
origins.) For example, you could explain the name of
the goddess Aphrodite by saying that she was born in
sea foam, since aphros is the Greek word for sea foam.
A religious aetiological myth explains the origin of
a religious ritual. For example, you could explain the
Greek religious ritual of the Eleusinian Mysteries by
saying that they originated when the Greek goddess
Demeter came down to the city of Eleusis and taught
the people how to worship her.
All three of these explanations are not true: Zeus’
anger is not the correct explanation for lightning and
thunder, Aphrodite’s name was not actually derived
from the Greek word aphros, and Demeter did not
establish her own religious rituals in the town of
Eleusis. Rather, all of these explanations had meaning

232

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

for the ancient Greeks, who told them in order to help
themselves understand their world.
2. HISTORICAL MYTHS
Historical myths are told about a historical event, and
they help keep the memory of that event alive.
Ironically, in historical myths, the accuracy is lost but
meaning is gained. The myths about the Trojan War,
including the Iliad and the Odyssey, could be classified
as historical myths. The Trojan War did occur, but the
famous characters that we know from the Iliad and the
Odyssey (Agamemnon, Achilles, Hector, etc.) probably
did not exist.
3. PSYCHOLOGICAL MYTHS
Psychological myths try to explain why we feel and act
the way we do. A psychological myth is different from
an aetiological myth because a psychological myth does
not try to explain one thing by way of something else
(like explaining lightning and thunder with Zeus’ anger
does). In a psychological myth, the emotion itself is
seen as a divine force, coming from the outside, that
can directly influence a person’s emotions. For
example, the goddess Aphrodite is sometimes seen as
the power of erotic love. When someone said or did
something that they did not want to do, the ancient
Greeks might have said that Aphrodite “made them” do
it.

The Twelve Labors of
Heracles

As a punishment for the murder of his own children
[see Heracles], Heracles was told by the Pythia that he
had to perform twelve tasks for Eurystheus, the king
of Tiryns. Eurystheus was also king of Mycenae [see
Argos on map]. Eurystheus had inherited the throne of
Mycenae from his father, Sthenelos, who had usurped
it from Amphitryon, Heracles’ mortal father [see
Heracles], so Heracles should really have been king of
Mycenae instead of Eurystheus. Heracles had to
perform any twelve tasks that Eurystheus set for him
even though Eurystheus had usurped Heracles’ throne
and was neither as strong or as brave as Heracles was.
This subordinate relationship to Eurystheus was
humiliating for Heracles, and that was no doubt part of
the punishment. The first six of Heracles’ labors take
place in the Peloponnese. The last six labors take place
throughout the Greek world.

233

234

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

1. THE NEMEAN LION
Eurystheus first told Heracles to kill the lion that had
been terrorizing the area of Nemea. This lion was no
ordinary lion; it was the offspring of Typhoeus [for
more on Typhoeus, see Origins]. Heracles tracked the
Nemean Lion to its cave, blocked off the entrance, and
tried to kill the lion by shooting it with his bow and
arrows. But the arrows bounced right off the lion’s hide,
doing the animal no harm. Undeterred, Heracles used
brute force to strangle the beast and brought the lion
back to Tiryns for Eurystheus. Eurystheus, surprised
that Heracles had survived the adventure, became very
fearful of Heracles. Because Eurystheus did not want
the lion, Heracles skinned it and used the hide as a
cloak, with the lion’s head serving as a sort of helmet.
The lion’s skin became Heracles’ trademark, and he
wore it on all his future endeavors.

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

235

Heracles killing the Nemean Lion while Athena stands near on a
lekythos found in the British Museum

2. THE LERNEAN HYDRA
Next, Eurystheus sent Heracles to kill the Hydra. The
Hydra was a sea monster (its name comes from hydōr
[ὕδωρ], which means “water” in Greek), that had many
snake-like heads. The Hydra lived in a swampy area
near Lerna, and Heracles came to its den. He engaged
the Hydra by grabbing at one of the heads and hacking
at it with his sword until the head was severed from the
body. But as soon as Heracles had cut off the Hydra’s
head, two more heads grew in its place. At this point,
Heracles realized that simply cutting off the Hydra’s
heads was not going to work. He also realized that
he could not kill the Hydra alone, so he called Iolaüs,

236

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

his charioteer, to bring a burning brand so he could
cauterize the neck to prevent new heads from growing
back after Heracles cut off each head. Heracles and
Iolaüs managed to destroy each head and burn the
neck for all the Hydra’s heads until just one head, which
was immortal, survived. This head he buried beneath a
giant rock. The Hydra’s blood was a deadly poison, so
Heracles dipped his arrows in the blood to make sure
that anyone he hit would die of his wound. Heracles
would one day regret that the Hydra’s blood was so
deadly.

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

237

Heracles fighting the Lernaean Hydra on a lekythos found in the
Louvre

3. CERYNITIAN HIND
Eurystheus then sent Heracles to capture the Cerynitian
Hind, a deer with golden horns that was sacred to the
goddess Artemis. Because the deer was sacred to
Artemis, Heracles could not kill it; he had to capture

238

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

it alive. For a year he tracked the deer, which was the
fastest deer in the world, around the forests of the
Peloponnese. He finally captured it in Arcadia when it
had paused for a little rest by creeping up behind it
and surprising it. On his way back to Tiryns, Heracles
encountered Apollo and Artemis hunting. Artemis was
not happy to find her sacred deer so constrained, but
after he explained his task, Artemis allowed Heracles
to take the deer so long as it remained unharmed and
would be released after he was finished with it.
4. ERYMANTHIAN BOAR
After the Cerynitian Hind had been released, Heracles
had to capture the Erymanthian Boar, which was
ravaging the countryside around Mount Erymanthus
and doing a lot of damage to the crops. On his way
to find the Erymanthian Boar, Heracles met Pholus, a
centaur who, unlike his fellow centaurs, was quite well
mannered. Pholus hosted Heracles like a proper guest
and offered him some wine. This wine was noticed by
the other centaurs, however, who are notorious for
loving wine but also for being unable to hold their
liquor. When the centaurs smelled the wine, they went
crazy and started attacking Heracles and Pholus in
order to steal it. The two successfully drove the
centaurs away, but in the process, Pholus dropped one
of Heracles’ arrows on his foot and, unfortunately, the
Hydra’s poison caused him to die in agony. This is yet
another example of Heracles hurting anyone who gets
too close to him. In this case it was an accident, but it
was no less deadly for Pholus. After this unfortunate

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

239

incident, Heracles caught up with the Erymanthian Boar
and trapped it by driving it into deep snow. He brought
the boar back alive to Tiryns to show to Eurystheus. But
Eurystheus was so frightened of the enormous beast
that he hid in a large storage jar (called a pithos) and
only peeked out a little so he could verify that Heracles
had completed his task.

240

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Heracles bringing the Erymanthean Boar to Eurystheus on an
amphora in the Louvre

At this point, word had spread throughout Greece that

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

241

Jason was looking for the greatest Greek heroes to go
with him on an expedition for the Golden Fleece.
Heracles took a break from his labors to join the crew.
However, he did not make the entire journey to Colchis
[map] (if he had would there be any use for Jason?).
The Argonauts left Heracles behind in Mysia while he
searched for his lover Hylas [see Argonauts]. Unable
to find Hylas, Heracles returned to Tiryns for his next
labor.
5. AUGEIAN STABLES
The next task Eurystheus had for Heracles was to clean
the Augeian stables in one day. Augeias was king of Elis
[map], and he had massive stables that had never been
cleaned, so they were filled with many years’ worth of
horse dung. Heracles came to Augeias and told him
that he could clean out the stables in one day if he paid
the right sum: one tenth of his cattle. Augeias agreed,
and Heracles set to work. He diverted the courses of
two rivers so they flowed right through the stables and
washed away the years of filth. Augeias had not
believed Heracles could perform the task, so he refused
to pay the outrageous sum. Heracles was livid, but at
this point there was nothing he could do, so he went
back to Tiryns.
6. STYMPHALIAN BIRDS
Next Heracles was sent to clear away the Stymphalian
birds. Lake Stymphalus was overrun by a flock of maneating birds. Heracles decided that a loud noise would

242

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

be just the thing, so he crashed a few shields together
to scare the birds into taking flight. As the birds flew
into the air, he picked them off one by one with his
arrows.

Heracles killing the Stymphalian Birds in a mosaic from Valencia
housed in the National Archaeological Museum in Madrid

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

243

7. THE CRETAN BULL
Heracles was then sent to capture the Cretan bull. This
bull was the father of the Minotaur [see Minotaur], and
Heracles trapped it and brought it back to Tiryns alive.
Eurystheus did not want it, so Heracles let the bull go.
The bull wandered up to the area around Athens [see
Athenae on map], and Theseus later killed him as one
of his heroic feats [see Theseus].
8. THE MARE OF DIOMEDES
The eighth labor required Heracles to retrieve the
mares of Diomedes. Diomedes was a Thracian [map]
king and he had man-eating mares. Heracles, with the
help of his lover Abderus, stole the mares from their
stable and herded them down to the seashore.
Diomedes’ men were in hot pursuit, so he left Abderus
to take care of the mares while he dispatched with
Diomedes and routed his men. When Heracles came
back, however, he found that the mares had eaten
most of Abderus. Heracles was upset at the death of
his lover, and he carefully buried Abderus’ remains. He
then gathered the mares into his ship and took them
back to Eurystheus. Again, Eurystheus did not want the
terrible creatures in his city, so Heracles let the mares
loose. They were eventually eaten by wild animals as
they wandered on Mount Olympus [see Olympus Mons
on map].

244

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

9. HIPPOLYTE’S BELT
For his next labor, Heracles had to retrieve the belt
of the Amazon queen, Hippolyte. Hippolyte and the
Amazons (female warriors) lived in Themiscyra on the
southern coast of the Black Sea. Heracles was joined
on this expedition by his friend Theseus, and they set
off together. When they reached Themiscyra, Hippolyte
came aboard their ship to meet with them. She agreed
to give them her belt with no fight, and everything
seemed to be going swimmingly for Heracles and
Theseus. However, Hera was not about to allow this
labor to be easy, so she came down from Olympus,
disguised as an Amazon. Hera told the Amazons that
Heracles was kidnapping their queen, and she roused
them to fight the heroes. Being angry because he
believed the whole thing had been a set-up, Heracles
killed Hippolyte and left with Theseus, taking
Hippolyte’s sister, Antiope, and the belt. Other versions
say that Hippolyte was not killed at all, but that she was
the one whom Theseus took with him to Athens, where
she became the mother of Theseus’ son Hippolytus
[see Theseus].
10. THE CATTLE OF GERYON
Next, Heracles was sent to steal the cattle of Geryon,
who was the King of Erytheia (which is modern-day
Cadiz in Spain). Geryon had three heads and three
upper bodies as well as six arms and six legs.
Furthermore, his cattle were guarded by a two-headed
watch dog named Orthus. Heracles decided to go

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

245

through Africa to make his way to Spain, and as he
crossed the Strait of Gibraltar, he set up large rocks on
either side, called the Pillars of Heracles, to show how
far he had come across the world. The sun beat down
upon him, greatly annoying Heracles, so he drew his
bow and pointed it at the sun, chastising it. Helius, the
sun god, was amused by this little stunt, so he lent his
golden cup to Heracles to use as a boat to take him the
rest of his way to Erytheia. When he arrived, Heracles
dispatched of Geryon and Orthus.

Heracles battling Geryon on a kylix in Staatliche
Antikensammlungen in Munich

11. THE GOLDEN APPLES OF THE HESPERIDES
Nearly done with his labors, Heracles now went to
retrieve the apples of the Hesperides. The Hesperides
were nymphs who lived in Libya near the mountains
where Atlas held up the world (now called the Atlas
Mountains) and tended a garden growing golden

246

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

apples. On his way there, Heracles passed by the
Caucasus Mountains and shot the eagle that had long
tortured Prometheus [see Prometheus], freeing him
from his bonds. Grateful for his help, Prometheus gave
Heracles some advice as to how to retrieve the apples.
Prometheus told Heracles to ask Atlas (who happened
to be Prometheus’ own brother) to go get the apples.
Heracles heeded his advice and asked Atlas to get the
apples while he held up the world. Atlas was happy to
retrieve the apples, but he had no intention of returning
to his post. When he returned with the apples, Atlas
offered to take them to Eurystheus for Heracles,
intending to never return. But Heracles knew what Atlas
was planning. He made a show of agreeing to Atlas’
plan, but he asked the Titan to hold the world just for
a minute so he could place a pad on his shoulders to
make the task more bearable. Atlas took the world onto
his shoulders again, and Heracles picked up the apples
and went back to Tiryns. After he had shown them to
Eurystheus, he gave them to Athena, and she, in turn,
returned them to the Hesperides.
12. CERBERUS
Heracles’ final labor was to bring Cerberus back from
Hades; of course, he could not kill the three-headed
dog in the process. Heracles began this labor by being
initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries. Then Hermes led
him down into the Underworld. In Hades, Heracles saw
his friends, Theseus and Peirithoüs, stuck to chairs [see
Theseus], and they begged Heracles to set them free.
Heracles managed to pry Theseus loose and began to

THE TWELVE LABORS OF HERACLES

247

move on to Peirithoüs, but the earth began to shake,
and Heracles desisted. Heracles and Theseus were
allowed to leave, but Hades insisted that Peirithoüs
remain. When Heracles came to Hades’ palace, he
asked the ruler of the Underworld if he could take
Cerberus with him. Hades agreed as long as Heracles
did not use weapons to capture him. Heracles grabbed
the hell-hound and dragged him all the way to Tiryns.
Eurystheus hid as soon as he saw Cerberus, and, from
his hiding place, ordered that he be taken back to
Hades, and Heracles obliged. With all the labors
completed, Heracles was now free to go about his life
as he wished. He was also promised that he would
become immortal upon his death.

Heracles approaching Cerberus on an amphora in the Louvre

What is a Myth?

Today people often use the word “myth” to mean an
untrue story or false rumor. For example, if one person
asked, “Is Friday the 13th an unlucky day?” another
person might answer, “No, that is just a myth.” But the
ancient Greeks did not use the word mythos (μῦθος) in
this way. For the Greeks, a mythos was simply a story.
It was not important whether the story was true or
false; what was important was the fact that the mode
of speech was that of a story. The Greek word logos
(λόγος), on the other hand, means a rational
explanation or analytical statement. These two words,
mythos and logos, point to two different kinds of speech,
corresponding to two different ways of thinking. One
was not considered more important than the other;
they were just different. If you put the two words
together: mythos + logos = mythology. And “mythology”
is the explanation or the analytical study of myths.

248

Why Are There So Many
Versions of Greek Myths?

The sources we have that tell the stories of the gods
and heroes come from many different authors from
different parts of the Mediterranean world and
different points in time, spanning several centuries.
Cultures and their beliefs change over the course of a
few decades, let alone centuries, so their stories adapt
too. But with these myths, even within the confines of
ancient Greek culture, each author had some artistic
freedom to reinvent the story and make it more
applicable or interesting to his audience. In this way,
myths function similarly to the stories of comic book
heroes, like Batman. Every author who tackles the story
of Batman’s origin has to bring something new to it or
it gets boring. There are some important elements that
have to stay the same (like Bruce Wayne’s parents being
killed when he is young as they leave the opera), but
other elements can change (as in the 1989 Tim Burton
film, which makes Jack Nicholson’s Joker the man who
killed Bruce’s parents). In the same way, the different
authors who wrote versions of the Greek myths took
liberties with various aspects of the myths, even though
249

250

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

(for the most part) the main outlines of the stories
remained the same. Thus, even though the Greek
myths were in a very real sense sacred stories, in this
respect they were more like modern literature, films,
or the stories of comic book heroes than the JudeoChristian Bible.

Xenia

Xenia (pronounced “zenee-a” and written as ξενία in
Greek) is guest-friendship, the relationship between a
guest and host. Because there were no hotels in ancient
Greece, travelers had to rely on the generosity of the
people who lived in the area through which they were
traveling. A traveler could knock on any door and he
would immediately be invited in, at least in theory.
Xenia is protected by Zeus and has specific rules of
conduct. The host should accept any traveler who
comes by and offer him a bath and a meal without
asking for the person’s name. After the guest has eaten,
the host may ask the traveler’s name and place of
origin. The guest has a responsibility to treat his host’s
house and possessions with respect as well as to
provide his name and background when asked. When
the guest is taking his leave of his host, the two will
exchange gifts as tokens of their newfound friendship.
Once a xenia relationship has been established
between two families, it can last for generations,
providing both families with a place to sleep on future
journeys.

251

Zeus

Roman name: Jupiter or Jove
Epithets: Kronion (Son of Cronus), Father of Gods and
Men
Symbols: throne, scepter, thunderbolt, aegis, eagle,
bull
Functions: ruler of the gods and god of the sky and
weather

252

ZEUS

253

Zeus with his thunderbolt on a kylix in the National
Archaeological Museum of Spain in Madrid

THE BIRTH OF ZEUS
Zeus was the youngest son of Cronus and Rhea. He
rescued his siblings from their father, led a revolt
against Cronus, and took his position as ruler of the
cosmos [see Origins]. Like his grandfather and father
before him, Zeus faced challenges to his rule, but he
succeeded where they failed and managed to thwart
his would be usurpers. After Zeus won the Battle of the
Gods and the Titans, Gaia sent the monster Typhoeus
against him [see Origins]. Later a race of giants revolted
against Zeus, but Zeus defeated them with the help of
his mortal son, Heracles.

254

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Zeus fighting Typhoeus on a hydria in the Staatliche
Antikensammlungen in Munich

ZEUS’ MARRIAGE TO METIS
As ruler of the universe, Zeus needed a wife, and he
chose Metis, who had helped him rescue his siblings
[see Origins]. Metis was the daughter of the Titans
Oceanus and Tethys. Her name means “intelligence”
or “cunning,” and she is the personification of those
qualities. When Metis was pregnant with Athena, Zeus
learned that Metis was fated to give birth to a son who
would one day overthrow his father. This would have
perpetuated the cycle of rulers of the universe being
overthrown by their sons, and Zeus wanted to end the
cycle once and for all. Since swallowing his children
did not work out well for Cronus, Zeus’ father, Zeus
decided to swallow his wife instead. So, Zeus swallowed
Metis while she was pregnant, leading to Athena’s very

ZEUS

255

unusual birth [see Athena]. Metis lived on within Zeus,
providing him with advice and helping him to become
known for his wisdom and thoughtful arbitration (for an
example, see Iliad 24.64-76).
ZEUS’ OTHER MARRIAGES AND LIAISONS:
THEMIS, DEMETER, LETO, AND HERA
After this marriage ended, Zeus had relationships with
several goddesses: Themis (Natural Order), who bore
the Horae (the Seasons) and the Moerae (the Fates);
Eurynome, who gave birth to the Graces; Demeter, who
bore Persephone; Mnemosyne (Memory), who
conceived the Muses; Dione, who delivered Aphrodite
[see Aphrodite]; and Leto, who begat Apollo and
Artemis. (Zeus, by the way, never has a sexual
encounter in vain; children are always produced.) At
some point Zeus married his sister, Hera, and together
they had three children: Ares, Eileithyia, and Hebe.
ZEUS’ RELATIONSHIPS WITH MORTAL WOMEN
Zeus pursued mortal women even more frequently
than he pursued goddesses. He sired the god Dionysus
with the mortal woman Semele [see Dionysus]. He
came to Alcmene in the form of her husband,
Amphitryon [see Heracles], fathering Heracles. He
turned Io into a cow to avoid Hera’s wrath [see Hermes
or Hera]. Io later traveled to Egypt and bore Epaphus,
who became an Egyptian god. Zeus abducted Europa in
the form of a bull and took her to Crete, where she bore
him three sons: Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Sarpedon.

256

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

He came to Danaë as a shower of gold, causing her
to become pregnant with Perseus. He came to Leda as
a swan, and she later laid two eggs with two sets of
twins. Two, Helen and Polydeuces (Pollux in Latin), were
immortal children of Zeus; the other two, Clytemnestra
and Castor, were the children of her husband,
Tyndareüs, and were mortal.
Hera was notoriously jealous of her husband’s affairs,
though this did not stop him from pursuing
relationships with both goddesses and mortals.

The Flight of Europa by Paul Manship from 1925, copies are in
the Indianapolis Museum of Art, the Los Angeles County Museum
of Art, the Columbus Museum in Columbus, Georgia, and the
Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington, D.C.

ZEUS

257

GANYMEDE

Zeus abducting Ganymede found in the Archaeological Museum
in Olympia

Zeus was also attracted to young boys. Ganymede, a

258

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

young and beautiful Trojan prince, was abducted by
Zeus and taken up to Olympus to be his personal
cupbearer (and probably his lover as well). In the
Aeneid, Virgil (also spelled Vergil) cites Ganymede’s
presence on Olympus as one of the reasons why Juno
was so angry at the Trojans and constantly harassed
Aeneas despite Jupiter’s commands to cease.

ZEUS

259

260

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

The Abduction of Ganymede by Correggio in the
Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna

THE JUSTICE OF ZEUS
Because Zeus was the ruler of the gods, the gods often
took their quarrels to Zeus for arbitration. He also
meted out punishments to immortals and mortals alike
who angered him. When the Titan Prometheus stole
fire to give to mortals, Zeus had him chained to a
mountain where every day, an eagle would come and
eat out the Titan’s liver only for it to grow back every
night and for the process to start again [see
Prometheus]. The Lydian king, Tantalus, was a son of
Zeus who was favored by the gods, but he wanted to
test their knowledge and power. He invited the gods
to a dinner party and served them a dish made from
his own son, Pelops. The gods knew immediately that
the meat they were served was human flesh (except
for Demeter, who was grieving for her daughter,
Persephone, and had eaten a bit of Pelops’ shoulder).
The gods grew very angry at Tantalus’ sacrilege. They
put Pelops together again (giving him an ivory shoulder
to replace the one that had been eaten), and Tantalus
was punished in the Underworld by having to stand
up to his chin in a lake that would recede any time
he moved to take a drink. What’s more, there was a
tree overhead with delicious, ripe fruit that would move
away from him when he tried to reach up and grab one.
(This myth is the origin of the word tantalize.)

ZEUS

261

ZEUS’ POSSIBLE ORIGINS
Zeus was the sky god of the Mycenaean (Greekspeaking) peoples who migrated to the Greek peninsula
sometime around 2000 BC. As the sky god, he was in
charge of the weather, and he was known to cause
thunderstorms by hurling his thunderbolt (lightning
bolt).
Zeus may have been conflated with a pre-Greek
Minoan fertility god on the island of Crete. This was the
child and/or young male consort of a female fertility
goddess. This would help to explain the story of Zeus
being brought to Crete as a baby and living on Crete
for a year in a cave [see Origins]. The Minoans seem to
have sometimes worshipped this god in the form of a
bull, and that might explain why Zeus sometimes takes
that form. The details of the story of the rape of Europa
probably came about to solidify Zeus’ connection to this
god and to the island of Crete as well as to establish the
mythological ruling family of the island (the Minoans
were said to have descended from King Minos, one of
the sons of Zeus and Europa). Zeus was easily adapted
to the ill-defined Roman god Jupiter (whose name
means “sky father”), as Jupiter did not have a strong
personality of his own.

262

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Zeus or Poseidon (we cannot tell which without the missing
object in the figure’s right hand) in the National Archaeological
Museum in Athens

ZEUS IN THE TROJAN WAR
Although Troy was one of Zeus’ favorite cities (as he
explains to Hera at Iliad 4.44-49), he seems to have
been neutral in the Trojan War. In Book 16 of the Iliad,
for example, Zeus first favors Patroclus, as he kills many
Trojans and their allies (including Sarpedon, another
one of his sons by Europa), but then makes sure that
Patroclus is, in turn, killed by Hector. Despite his love

ZEUS

263

for Troy, however, Zeus knew that as long as the
Trojans made certain decisions, Troy would eventually
fall (this is clear, for example, at Iliad 4.68-72). (To the
Greeks, fate was partially determined by choice, as can
be seen in Achilles’ choice in the Iliad.) At one point
(Iliad 8.1-18), Zeus even ordered a cessation of divine
involvement in the conflict, but this was only a
temporary pause.

Image Attributions

Aegis
Image 1: “Athena owl Met 09.221.43” by Marie Lan
Nguyen is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Agamemnon
Image 1: “The Sacrifice of Iphigenia” by Web Gallery
of Art is licensed under Public Domain
Image 2: “Fourth Style fresco depicting the Sacrifice
of Iphigenia, from the House of the Tragic Poet in
Pompeii, Naples National Archaeological Museum
(17430222481)” by Carole Raddato is licensed under CC
BY-SA 2.0
Aphrodite
Image 1: “Casa della Venere in Conchiglia Pompeii
23” by MatthiasKabel is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Image 2: “Ludovisi_Aphrodite2_Shapiro” by Susan O.
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Apollo
Image 1: “Apollo of the Belvedere Front view” by
Livioandronico2013 is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
265

266

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Image 2: “Apollo & Daphne Bernini Shapiro1” by
Susan O. Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Image 3: “Apollo & Daphne Shapiro5” by Susan O.
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Image 4: “Apollo black bird AM Delphi 8140” by
Finalgo is licensed under CC-BY-SA 2.0 DE
Ares
Image 1: “Ludovisi_Ares1_Shapiro” by Susan O.
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Image 2: “Diego Velázquez – Mars, God of War –
WGA24429” by Susan O. Shapiro is licensed under CC
BY 4.0
The Argonauts
Image 1: “The Harpyes annoy the king Phineus” by
Egisto Sani is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Artemis
Image 1: “Abraham Bloemaert – Apollo and Diana
Punishing Niobe by Killing her Children – Google Art
Project” by Google Cultural Institute is licensed under
Public Domain
Image 2: “Actaeon” by Aavindraa is licensed under
Public Domain
Image 3: “Titian – Diana and Actaeon – WGA22883”
by Google Cultural Institute is licensed under Public
Domain
Image 4: “Gorgon Kameiros BM GR1860.4-4.2 n2” by
Ealdgyth is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Image 5: “Potnia Theron c. 650 BC; Mykonos

IMAGE ATTRIBUTIONS

267

Museum; Shapiro photo” by Susan O. Shapiro is
licensed under CC BY 4.0
Athena
Image 1: “Athena’s Birth: the earliest picture” by
Egisto Sani is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Image 2: “Athena Parthenos The Parthenon
Nashville” by Aaron Archuleta is licensed under CC-BYSA 3.0
Image 3: “Parthenon” by Onkel Tuca! is licensed
under CC-BY-SA 3.0
Image 4: “parthenon nashville west pediment centre”
by damian entwistle is licensed under CC BY-NC 2.0
Image 5: “ACMA Athéna contemplative” by Marsyas is
licensed under CC BY-SA 2.5
Image 6: “Athena in Naples Museum Shapiro” by
Susan O. Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Image 7: “001MA Athena” by Ricardo Andre Frantz is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
The Delphic Oracle
Image 1: “Delphi, The Sacred Way – IX – The
Athenians’ Stoa” by Egisto Sani is licensed under CC BYNC 2.0
Image 2: “The Temple of Apollo at Delphi” by Luarvick
is licensed under CC BY-NC 2.0
Image 3: “Delphi” by Albert Tournaire is licensed
under Public Domain
Image 4: “Themis Aigeus Antikensammlung Berlin
F2538 n2“ by Bibi Saint-Pol is licensed under Public
Domain

268

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Image 5: “Camillo Miola – The Oracle [1880]” by
Gandalf’s Gallery is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Image 6: “Omphalos, AM Delphi, 0004” by Zde is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
Image 7: “Antiochos Hierax Tetradrachm 680534” by
Classical Numismatic Group, Inc is licensed under CC
1.0 Universal
Demeter
Image 1: “Bernini Persephone Shapiro5” by Susan O.
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Image 2: “Rape of Prosepina September 2015-2b” by
Alvesgaspar is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
Image 3: “Eleusis2” by Napoleon Vier is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0
Dionysus
Image 1: “Kylix Dionysus on a ship between dolphins
530 BC, Staatliche Antikensammlungen Munich
120638x” by Zde is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Image 2: “Dancing Maenad Met 35.11.3” by MarieLan Nguyen is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image
3:
“Mainade
satyros
Staatliche
Antikensammlungen 2654” by Bibi Saint-Pol is licensed
under CC 0.0 Universal
Image 4: “Death Pentheus Louvre G445” by Jastrow is
licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image 5: “Titian Bacchus and Ariadne” by National
Gallery is licensed under Public Domain
Image 6: “‘Sparagmos’ By The Achilles Painter – XXII”
by Egisto Sani is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0

IMAGE ATTRIBUTIONS

269

Hades
Image 1: “Greeks in Italy – IX: The Amazing
‘Underworld Painter’” by Egisto Sani is licensed under
CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Image 2: “Persephone Hades BM Vase E82” by MarieLan Nguyen is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image 3: “Pluto Serapis and Persephone Isis
Heraklion museum” by Jebulon is licensed under CC0
1.0
Hephaestus
Image 1: “Venus und Mars werden im Netz
überrascht” by McZusatz is licensed under PD-US
Hera
Image 1: “Hera Prometheus Cdm Paris 542” by Bibi
Saint-Pol is licensed under CC0 1.0
Image 2: “IMG_3332M Pierre Paul Rubens.
1577-1640. Junon et Argus. 1610. Juno and Argus.
Cologne Wallraf Richards Museum” by jean louis
mazieres is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Heracles
Image 1: “Herakles strangling snakes Louvre G192”
by Marie-Lan Nguyen is licensed under CC0 1.0
Image 2: “The Infant Hercules Strangling Serpents in
his Cradle – Joshua Reynolds (1788)” by Shuishouyue is
licensed under Public Domain
Image 3: “Herakles and Linos” by Egisto Sani is
licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Image 4: “Herakles Nessos Louvre K537” by Jastrow is
licensed under CC0 1.0

270

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Hermes
Image 1: “Hermes kriophoros Louvre F159” by MarieLan Nguyen is licensed under CC0 1.0
Image
2:
“Mousai
Helikon
Staatliche
Antikensammlungen Schoen80 n1” by Bibi Saint-Pol is
licensed under CC0 1.0
Image 3: “Caduceus” by Eliot Lash is licensed under
CC0 1.0
Image 4: “Peter Paul Rubens 080” by The Yorck
Project is licensed under GNU Free Documentation
License
Image 5: “Peter Paul Rubens – Mercury and Argos,
1636-1638” by Shuishouyue is licensed under Public
Domain
Image 6: “Hermes ithyphallicus Herm 520 BC, NAMA
3728 102563” by Zde is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
The Iliad – An Introduction
Image 1: “Júpiter y Tetis, por Dominique Ingres” by
Alonso de Mendoza is licensed under Public Domain
Image 2: “Peter Paul Rubens 115” by Crisco 1492 is
licensed under Public Domain
Image 3: “Discovery of Achilles on Skyros by Nicholas
Poussin ca. 1656 cropped” by Shonagon is licensed
under Public Domain
Image 4: “Ajax and Achilles at Draughts” by Bradley
Weber is licensed under CC BY 2.0
Image 5: “Euphronius Krater Shapiro2” by Susan
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Image 6: “Mykonos Vase Shapiro5” by Susan O.
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0

IMAGE ATTRIBUTIONS

271

Image 7: “Aias Kassandra Louvre G458” by Bibi SaintPol is licensed under CC0 1.0
The Minotaur
Image 1: “Theseus Slaying Minotaur by Barye” by
Chhe is licensed under Public Domain
The Odyssey – An Introduction
Image 1: “Odysseus and Polyphemus, Proto-Attic
neck amphora, ca 650 BC, AM Eleusis, 081141” by Zde is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
Image 2: “Greek – One of Odysseus’ Men
Transformed Into a Pig – Walters 541483 – Profile” by
Walters Art Museum is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Image 3: “Odysseus under ram, archaic small bronze,
AM Delphi,060080” by Zde is licensed under CC BY-SA
4.0
Image 4: “AN7497001” by Trustees of the British
Museum is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Image 5: “The Sirens” by N. C. Wyeth from The
Odyssey of Homer, translated by George Herbert
Palmer. Copyright 1929 by N. C. Wyeth; copyright
renewed (c)1957 by Carolyn Wyeth. Used by permission
of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. All rights reserved.
The Oresteia – An Introduction
Image 1: “Alabaster cinerary urn of Vel Remzna
Crespe with the murder of Clytemnestra” by Dan
Diffendale is licensed under CC BY- NC -SA 2.0
Image 2: “Orestes Apollo Louvre Cp710” by Bibi SaintPol is licensed under CC0 1.0

272

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Origins
Image 1: “The Mutilation of Uranus by Saturn” by
Dodo is licensed under PD-US
Image 2: “Sickle without background” by Amada44 is
licensed under CC BY 2.0
Image 3: “Omphalos, AM Delphi, 0004” by Zde is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
Image 4: “Atlas (Farnese Globe)” by Gabriel Seah is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Image 5: “Objectivist1” by Michael Greene is licensed
under CC BY 2.0
Orpheus
Image 1: “Orfeo, euridice ed hermes, da torre del
greco, copia augustea da orig. greco del 450 ac ca.
6727” by Sailko is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Persephone
Image 1: “Pinax with Persephone and Hades
Enthroned, 500-450 BC, Greek, Locri Epizephirii,
Mannella district, Sanctuary of
Persephone, terracotta – Cleveland Museum of Art –
DSC08242” by Daderot is licensed under CC0 1.0
Image 2: “Dante Gabriel Rossetti – ProserpineGoogle Art Project” by Tate Britain is licensed under PDUS
Perseus
Image 1: “Correggio – Danaë -WGA05341” by Web
Gallery of Art is licensed under Public Domain
Image 2: “Danae gold shower CA925” by Marie Lan
Nguyen is licensed under CC0 1.0

IMAGE ATTRIBUTIONS

273

Image 3: “Perseus, Pegasus, and Medusa (Met)” by
Lucas is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image 4: “Perseus Cellini Loggia dei Lanzi 2005 09 13”
by Marie Lan Nguyen is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image 5: “Perseus with the Head of Medusa MET
DP249451” by Pharos is licensed under CC0 1.0
Image 6: “Perseus and andromeda amphora” by
Montrelais is licensed under by CC BY 3.0
Poseidon
Image 1: “Athena Poseidon Cdm Paris DeRidder222”
by Shakko is licensed under PD-US
Image 2: “Medusa by Caravaggio 2” by “Ghirlandajo”
is licensed under Public Domain
Image 3: “Cape Sounion” by Stella*R is licensed
under CC BY-SA 2.0
Image 4: “Poseidon Sounion Shapiro” by Susan
Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
Sphinx
Image 1: “Corinth Archaeological Museum Sphinx
Shapiro photo” by Susan O. Shapiro is licensed under
CC BY 4.0
Image 2: “Oedipus and the Sphinx of Thebes, Red
Figure Kylix, c. 470 BC, from Vulci, attributed to the
Oedipus Painter, Vatican Museums (9665213064)” by
Carole Roddato is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0
Image 3: “Oedipus and the Sphinx 1864” by Met
Museum is licensed under Public Domain
Theseus

274

MYTHOLOGY UNBOUND: AN ONLINE TEXTBOOK FOR
CLASSICAL MYTHOLOGY

Image 1: “Drunken satyr MAN Napoli Inv5628 n0” by
Marie Lan Nguyen is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image 2: “Theseus Minotaur BM Vase E84” by Marie
Lan Nguyen is licensed under CC BY 2.5
Image 3: “Statue of Ariadne on Naxos Shapiro1” by
Susan O. Shapiro is licensed under CC BY 4.0
The Twelve Labors of Heracles
Image 1: “Herakles 1st labor: The Nemean Lion” by
Egisto Sani is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Image 2: “Lernaean Hydra Louvre CA598” by Bibi
Saint-Pol
Image 3: “Heracles’ fourth Labor: The Erymanthian
boa” by Egisto Sani is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
Image 4: “Mosaico de los trabajos de Hércules,
Museo Arqueológico Nacional, Madrid, España, 2016
04” by Benjamín Núñez González is licensed under CC
BY-SA 4.0
Image
5:
“Herakles
Geryon
Staatliche
Antikensammlungen 2620” by Bibi Saint-Pol is licensed
under CC0 1.0
Image 6: “Herakles Kerberos Louvre F204” by Bibi
Saint-Pol is licensed under CC0 1.0
Zeus
Image 1: “Kylix (29366674371)” by Tm is licensed
under CC BY 2.0
Image
2:
“Zeus
Typhon
Staatliche
Antikensammlungen 596” by Bibi Saint-Pol is licensed
under CC0 1.0
Image 3: “The Flight of Europa” by Kwork2 is licensed
under CC BY 2.0

IMAGE ATTRIBUTIONS

275

Image 4: “Zeus-Gany-sculpt1” by Tetrakyts is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0
Image 5: “The Abduction of Ganymede” by Marsyas is
licensed under Public Domain
Image 6: “NAMA Poséidon” by Marsyas is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0

