18 Mahāpurāṇas.  
These are condensed versions of the stories from the Puranas. They generally 
do not contain any Sets of Names or Praises of the Deities. 
 
1.  Brahma Purana      2 
2.  Padma Purana      57 
3.  Vishnu Purana      123 
4.  Shiva Purana      277 
5.  Vamana Purana      430 
6.  Markandeya Purana     522 
7.  Varaha Purana      635 
8.  Agni Purana      704 
9.  Kurma Purana      766 
10.  Bhagavad Maha Purana    821 
11.  Linga Purana      960 
12.  Narada Purana      1007 
13.  Skanda Purana      1043 
14.  Garuda Purana      1119 
15.  Matsya Purana      1173 
16.  Vayu Purana      1226 
17.  Bhavishya Purana     1276 
18.  Brahmanda Purana(incomplete)  1298-1348 
  

1 
 







Title: Brahma Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Brahma Purana – Contains stories of creation, Naimisharanya sacrifice, genealogy of sages, Dhruva, Prithu, and dynasties.


Title: Padma Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Padma Purana – Describes creation, rituals, devotion, pilgrimage, and Lord Vishnu’s glory.


Title: Vishnu Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Vishnu Purana – Describes creation, avatars of Vishnu, dynasties, cosmology & Dharma.


Title: Shiva Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Shiva Purana – Narrates the stories of Shiva, Parvati, Ganesha, Kartikeya and Shiva linga worship.


Title: Vamana Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Vamana Purana – Story of Vamana avatar and King Bali.


Title: Markandeya Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Markandeya Purana – Contains Devi Mahatmyam, worship of Shakti, & creation cycles.


Title: Varaha Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Varaha Purana – Story of Varaha avatar, saving Earth, pilgrimages & rituals.


Title: Agni Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Agni Purana – Knowledge of rituals, astronomy, medicine, military science & ethics.


Title: Kurma Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Kurma Purana – Kurma avatar teachings, Samudra Manthan, Vishnu philosophy.


Title: Bhagavata Purana (Bhagavata Maha Purana)
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Bhagavata Purana – Krishna’s life, devotion (Bhakti), incarnation stories & Moksha.


Title: Linga Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Linga Purana – Importance of Linga, Shiva creation philosophy & cosmic science.


Title: Narada Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Narada Purana – Teachings of Sage Narada on Bhakti, Dharma & ritual practice.


Title: Skanda Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Skanda Purana – Stories of Lord Kartikeya (Skanda), pilgrimages & Shiva devotion.


Title: Garuda Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Garuda Purana – Death rituals, afterlife, karma, rebirth & funeral rites.


Title: Matsya Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Matsya Purana – Matsya avatar & the great flood narrative.


Title: Vayu Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Vayu Purana – Cosmology, geography & genealogy of kings.


Title: Bhavishya Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Bhavishya Purana – Prophecies about future eras (Kali Yuga & beyond).


Title: Brahmanda Purana
Category: Eastern – Hindu Itihasa
Translator: Unknown
Language: Sanskrit / English summary
Source: 18 Mahāpurāṇas (compiled)
---
Brahmanda Purana – Includes Lalita Devi story & universe structure.








1. BRAHMA PURANA  
Preliminaries  
There was a forest known as Naimisharanya. The sages (maharshis) arranged 
for a sacrifice (yajna) in this forest and the ceremony went on for twelve 
years. Naimisharanya forest was a wonderful place to arrange sacrifices in. 
The climate was pleasant. There were trees full of climate was pleasant. There 
were trees full of flowers and fruit. There was no shortage of food in the 
forest, and animals, birds and sages lived thee happily. Many sages came to 
attend the sacrifice that had been arranged in Naimisharanya. With them was 
Romaharshana (alternatively Lomaharshana), Veda Vyasa's disciple. Veda 
Vyasa had instructed this disciple of his in the knowledge of the Puranas. The 
assembled sages worshipped the learned Romaharshana and said, "Please tell 
us the stories of the Puranas. Who created the universe, who is its preserver 
and who will destroy it? Please instruct us in all these mysteries". 
Romaharshana replied, "Many years ago, Daksha and the other sages had 
asked Brahma these very questions. I have learnt about Brahma's replies from 
my guru) teacher) Veda Vyasa. I will relate to you what I know". 
In the beginning, there was water everywhere and the Brahman slept on this 
water in the form of Vishnu. Since water is called nara and since ayana means 
a bed, Vishnu is known as Narayana. In the water there emerged a golden egg. 
Brahma was born inside this egg. Since he created himself, he is called 
Svayambhu, born (bhu) by himself (svayam). For one whole year, Brahma lived 
inside the egg. He then split the egg into two and created heaven and the 
earth from the two parts of the egg. Skies, directions, time, language and 
senses were created in both heaven and earth. From the powers of his mind, 
Brahma gave birth to seven great sages. Their names were Marichi, Atri, 
Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vashishtha. Brahma also created the God 
Rudra and the sage Sanatkumara. 
More Creation  

2 
 



To continue with the process of creation, Brahma gave birth to a man and a 
woman from his own body. The man was named Svayambhuva Manu and the 
woman was named Shatarupa. Humans are descended from Manu. That is the 
reason they are known as manava. Manu and Shatarupa had three sons 
named Vira, Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Uttanapada's son was the great 
Dhruva. Dhruva performed very difficult meditation (tapasya) for three 
thousand divine years. Brahma was so pleased at this that he granted Dhruva 
an eternal place in the sky, near the constellation that is known as saptarshi or 
the seven sages. This is the constellation Ursa Majoris and Dhruva is the pole 
Star. 
In Dhruva's line there was a king named Prachinavarhi. Prachinavarhi had ten 
sons, known as the Prachetas. These Prachetas were supposed to look after 
the world and rule over it, but they were not interested in such mundane 
matters. They went off instead to perform tapasya under theocean. The  
tapasya went on for ten thousand years. The upshot was that the earth had 
no ruler and began to suffer. People started to die and thick forests sprouted 
everywhere. So thick were the forests that even the winds could not blow.  
News of this catastrophe reached the Prachetas. They were furious with the 
trees and created wind (vayu) and fire (agni) from their mouths. The wind 
dried up the trees and the fire burnt them, so that, very soon, there were very 
few trees left on earth.  Everyone was alarmed at the effects of the Prachetas 
anger. The moon-God Soma (or Chandra) came to the Prachetas with a 
beautiful woman and said, "Prachetas, please control your anger. You need 
someone to rule over the world so that you can concentrate on your tapasya. 
This woman is named Marisha. Her son will rule over the world". 
The Prachetas agreed to this proposal and Daksha was born. The word praja 
means subject and the word pati means master. Since Daksha ruled over the 
world and its subjects, Daksha came to be known as Prajapati. 
The sages interrupted Romaharshana. They said, "Sage, we are completely 
confused. We have heard that Daksha was born from Brahma's toe. And yet 
you have told us that Daksha was the son of the Prachetas. How is this 

3 
 



possible?" Romaharshana replied, "There is no reason for bewilderment. 
Many Dakshas have been born to rule over the world. One was born from 
Brahma's toe, yet another was the son of the Prachetas."  
Daksha's Offspring  
Daksha's wife was named Asikli and Asikli gave birth to five thousand sons. 
They were known as the Haryashvas. The Haryashvas were destined to rule 
over the world. But the sage Narada went to the Haryashvas and said, "How 
can you rule over the world if you don't even know what the world looks like? 
Are you familiar with its geography and its limits? First find out about these 
things, before you contemplate ruling over the world." The Haryashvas went 
off to explore the world and never returned. 
Daksha and Asikli then had another thousand sons who were named the 
Shavalashvas. Narada told them what he had told the Haryashvas and the 
Shavalashvas also went off to explore the world and never returned. 
Daksha and Asikli were distressed that their children should disappear in this 
manner. Daksha blamed Narada for the instigation and proposed to kill him. 
But Brahma intervened and persuaded Daksha to control his anger. This 
Daksha agreed to do, provided that his conditions were met. "Brahma must 
marry my daughter Priya," he said. "And Narada must be born as Priya's son." 
These conditions were accepted. In fact, Daksha and Asikli had sixty 
daughters. (Elsewhere, the Brahma Purana mentions fifty daughters.) Ten of 
these daughters were married to the God Dharma and thirteen to the sage 
Kashyapa. Twenty-seven daughters were married to Soma or Chandra. The 
remaining daughters were married to the sages Arishtanemi, Vahuputra, 
Angirasa and Krishashva. 
The ten daughters who were married to the God Dharma were named 
Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muhurta. Sadhya 
and Vishva. Arundhati's children were the objects (vishaya) of the world. 
Vasu's children were the eight Gods known as the Vasus. Their names were 
Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Salila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhasa. Anala's son 

4 
 



was Kumara. Because Kumara was brought up by Goddesses known as the 
Krittikas, he came to be called Kartikeya. Prabhasa's son was Vishvakarma. 
Vishvakarma was skilled in architecture and the making of jewelry. He became 
the  architect of the Gods. 
Sadhya's children were the Gods known as Sadhyadevas and Vishva's children 
were the Gods known as Vishvadervas. The twenty-seven daughters of Daksha 
who were married to Soma are known as the nakshatras (stars). 
As you have already been told, Kashyapa married thirteen of Daksha's 
daughters. Their names were Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Khasa, Surabhi, 
Vinata. Tamra, Krodhavasha, Ila, Kadru and Muni. 
Aditi's sons were the twelve Gods known as the adityas. Their names were 
Vishnu, Shakra. Aryama, Dhata, Vidhata, Tvashta, Pusha, Vivasvana, Savita, 
MitraVaruna, Amsha and Bhaga. Diti's sons were the daityas (demons). They 
were named Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu, and amongst their descendants 
were several other powerful daityas liked Bali and Banasura. Diti also had a 
daughter named Simhika who was married to a danava (demon) named 
Viprachitti. Their offspring's were terrible demons like Vatapi, Namuchi, Ilvala, 
Maricha and the nivatakavachas. The hundred sons of Danu came to be 
known as danavas. The danavas were thus cousins to the daityas and also to 
the adityas. In the danava line were born demons like the poulamas and 
kalakeyas. 
Arishta's sons were the gandharvas (singers of heaven). Surasa gave birth to 
the snakes (sarpa). Khasa's children were the yakshas (demi-Gods who were 
the companions of Kubera, the God of wealth) and the rakshasas (demons). 
Surabhi's descendants were cows and buffaloes. 
Vinata had two sons named Aruna and Garuda. Garuda became the king of 
the birds. Tamra has six daughters. From these daughters were born owls, 
eagles, vultures, crows, water-fowl, horses, camels and donkeys. 
Krodhavasha had fourteen thousand children known as nagas (snakes). Ila 
gave birth to trees, creepers, shrubs and bushes. Kadru's sons were also 

5 
 



known as nagas or snakes. Among the more important of Kadru's sons were 
Ananta, Vasuki, Takshaka and Nahusha. 
Muni gave birth to the apsaras (dancers of heaven). Diti's children (daityas) 
and Auditi's children (adityas) continually fought amongst themselves. On one 
particular occasion, the Gods succeed in killing many of the demons. Thirsting 
for revenge, Diti began to pray to her husband, Kashyapa that she might given 
birth to a son who would kill Indra, the king of the Gods. 
Kashyapa found it difficult to refuse his wife outright. "All right", he said. "You 
have to bear the son in your womb for a hundred years. And throughout this 
period, you will have indeed kill Indira. But if you do not observe these 
instructions to the letter, your desire will not be satisfied." Diti resolved to do 
as her husband had bidden her. But Indra had got to know about Diti's resolve 
and was waiting for an opportunity to save himself. There was an occasion 
when, tired after her prayers. Diti went to sleep without first washing her feet. 
This was an unclean act and it gave Indra the required opportunity. He 
adopted a miniscule form and entered Diti's womb. With his weapon vajra, he 
sliced up the baby inside the womb into seven parts. The baby naturally began 
to cry at the pain. 
Indra kept on saying, "ma ruda," that is, "don't cry." But the bay, or rather its 
seven parts, would not listen. Indra thereupon sliced up each of the seven 
parts into seven more sections, so that there were forty-nine sections in all. 
When these forty-nine sections were born, they came to known as the 
Maruts, from the words that Indra had addressed them. Since Diti had not 
been able to adhere to the conditions her husband had set, the Maruts did 
not kill Indra. They instead became Indra's followers or companions, and were 
treated as Gods. 
Prithu In Dhruva's line there was a king named Anga, Anga was religious and 
followed the righteous path. But unfortunately, Anga's son Vena inherited 
none of the good qualities of his father. 

6 
 



Vena's mother was Sunitha and she happened to be the daughter of Mrityu. 
Mrityu was notorious for his evil ways and deeds. Vena spent a lot of time 
with his maternal grandfather and picked up these evil characteristics. 
Vena gave up the religion that was laid down in the Vedas and stopped all 
yajnas. He instructed his subjects that he alone was to be worshiped. 
The sages led by Marichi came to Vena to try and persuade him to mend his 
ways. But Vena was in no mood to listen. He insisted that there was no one 
equal to him in the whole universe. 
The sages realized that Vena was a lost cause. They physically caught hold of 
Vena and began to knead his right thigh. From this kneading thee emerged a 
horrible looking creature. It was a dwarf and its complexion, was extremely 
dark. The sage Atri was so aghast at the dwarf's appearance that he blurted 
out, "nishida", which means "sit". From this, the dwarf came to be known as 
nishada. The race of nishadas became hunters and fishermen, and lived in the 
Vindhya mountains. From them were also descended uncivilized races like 
Tusharas and Tunduras. 
The evil that was in Vena's body and mind came out with the emergence of 
the nishada. When the sages began to knead Vena's right arm, Prithu 
emerged. He shone like a flaming fire and his energy lit up the four directions. 
He held a bow in his hand and he was clad in beautiful armour. As soon as 
Prithu was born, Vena died. 
All the rivers and the oceans arrived with their waters and their jewels to 
anoint Prithu as the king. The Gods and the sages also came for the 
coronation. Brahma himself crowned Prithu the king of the earth. He also took 
the opportunity to apportion out the lordships of other parts of the universe. 
Soma was appointed Lord over creepers, herbs, starts (nakshatras), planets 
(grahas), sacrifices, meditation (tapasya) and over the first of the four classes 
(brahmanas). Varuna became Lord of the oceans, Kubera of all the kings, 
Vishnu of the adityas, Agni of vasus, Daksha of all Prahlada of daityas and 

7 
 



danavas, Yama of the pritris (ancestors), Shiva of yakshas, rakshasas and 
pishachas (ghosts), and Himalaya of the mountains. 
The ocean (samudra) was made the Lord of all rivers. Chitraratha of 
gandharvas, Vasuki of nagas, Takshaka of sarpas, Garuda of birds, the tiger of 
deer, Airavata of elephants, Ucchaihshrava of horses, the bull of cows and the 
ashvattha tree (a banyan) of all trees. Brahma also appointed four overlords 
(dikapalas) for the four directions. To the east there was Sudhanva, to the 
south Shankhapada, to the west Ketumana and to the north Hiranyaroma. 
Prithu was a king who ruled the earth well. During his reign, the earth was 
laden with foodgrains. 
The cows were full of milk and the subjects were happy. To glorify King Prithu, 
the sages performed a sacrifice and from this sacrifice there emerged two 
races known as the sutas and the magadhas should sing praises in honor of 
Prithu. 
"But what praise will we sing?" asked the sutas and the magadhas. "Prithu is 
still young. He has not done much that can be praised". 
"That may be true," replied the sages. "But he will do wonderous deeds in the 
future. Sing praises of those wonderful deeds. We will tell you about them." 
Having learnt of these future deeds from the sages, the sutas and the 
magadhas began to compose songs and chant praises in honor of Prithu. 
These stories were related throughout the earth. Some of Prithu's subjects 
heard these stories and came to see Prithu. "King," they said. "We have heard 
of your great deeds. But we find it difficult to make a living. Please indicate to 
us our habitations on earth. And tell us where we may be able to get the food 
we need for subsistence." King Prithu picked up his bow and arrow. He 
decided to kill the earth, since the earth was not yielding foodgrains to his 
subjects. The earth adopted the form of a cow and began to flee. But 
wherever the earth went, Prithu followed with his bow and arrow. He 
followed the earth to the heaven and to the underworld. 

8 
 



Finally, in desperation, the earth started to pray to Prithu. "King," she said, 
"please control your anger. I am a woman. Killing me will only mean a sin for 
you. Besides, what purpose will killing me serve? Your subjects will then be 
without a place to live in. There must be some other way of ensuring that your 
subjects can make a living.The earth then herself offered a solution and King 
Prithu did her bidding. With his bow, he leveled out the earth. The plains 
could now be used for villages and cities and for agriculture and animal 
husbandry. The plains could now be used for villages and cities and for 
agriculture and animal husbandry. The mountains were gathered together in 
select places, instead of being littered over whole earth. Earlier, Prithu's 
subjects had lived off fruits and roots. Now Prithu milked the earth (in her 
form of a cow) and obtained the seeds of foodgrains on which people could 
live. Because of Prithu's deeds, the earth came to be known as prithivi. 
Manvantaras A manvantara is an era. There are four smaller eras (yugas) and 
their names are Satya or Krita Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga. 
Each cycle of Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga is called a 
mahayuga. A mahayuga comprises of 12,000 years of the Gods, or 
equivalently, 4,320,000 years for human. 71 mahayugas constitute a 
manvantara and 14 manvantaras constitute a cycle (kalpa). One kalpa is one 
of Brahma's days and the universe is destroyed at the end of a Kalpa. 
Each manvantara is ruled over by a Manu. In the present kalpa, six 
manvantaras have already passed and the names of the six Manus who ruled 
were Svayambhuva, Svarochisha, Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata and Chakshusha. 
The name of the seventh Manu, who rules over the seventh manvantara of 
the present kalpa, is Vaivasvata. 
The titles of the seven great sages (saptarshi) as well as the tile of Indra 
change from manvantara to manvantara. The Gods also change. 
In the present vaivasvata manvantara, the seven great sages are Atri, 
Vashishtha, Kashyapa, Goutama, Bharadvaja, Vishvamitra and Jamadagni. The 
Gods now are the sadhyas, the rudras, the vishwadevas, the vasus, the 
maruts, the adityas and the two ashvinis. 

9 
 



There will be seven Manus in the future before the universe is destroyed. Five 
of these Manus will be known as Savarni Manus. The remaining two will be 
called Bhoutya and Rouchya. 
The Sun and the Solar Dynasty You have probably forgotten by now that 
Kashyapa and Aditi had a son named Vivasvana. This was the sun God, also 
known as Surya or Martanda. 
Surya was married to Samjna, Vishvakarma's daughter. They had two sons. 
The fist son was Vaivasvata Manu and the second son was Yama or 
Shradhadeva, the God of death. Yama had a twin sister named Yamuna. The 
sun's energy was so strong that Samjna could not bear to look at her husband. 
Through her powers, she created an image from her own body that looked 
exactly like her. This image was called Chhaya (shadow).Samjna told Chhaya, 
"I cannot bear the energy of my husband, I am going off to my father's house. 
Stay here, pretend to be Samjna and look after my children. Under no 
circumstances tell anyone, certainly not my husband, that your are not 
Samjna.”  
“I will do as you have asked me to," replied Chhaya. "But the moment 
someone curses me or pulls me by the hair, I shall be forced to reveal the 
truth." Samjna went to her father Vishvakarma kept asking her to return to 
her husband. But this Samjna refused to do. Instead, she went to the land 
known as Uttara Kuru and started to live there as a mare. 
Meanwhile, Surya, who had not realized that Samjna had been replaced by 
Chhaya, had two sons through Chhaya. They were named Savarni Manu and 
Shani (Saturn). As soon as her own children were born, Chhaya no longer 
displayed as much of love for Samjna's children as she used to do. Vaivasvata 
Manu was a quiet sort of person and he ignored the implied neglect. But Yama 
was not the tolerant. Besides, he was also younger. He raised his leg to kick 
Chhaya. At this, Chhaya cursed Yama that his legs would fall off. 
Yama went and complained to Surya. " I have not really kicked her," he said. "I 
only threatened to. And does a mother ever curse her children?”  

10 
 



“I can't undo the curse, " replied Surya. "At best, I can reduce its severity. Your 
legs will not actually fall off. Some of the flesh from your legs will fall off onto 
the earth and create worms. 
Thereby, you will be freed of your curse." But nevertheless, Surya felt that 
there was some truth in Yama's asking whether a mother would ever curse 
her children. He taxed Chhaya with the truth, but Chhaya would not reveal 
anything Surya then grasped her by the hair and threatened to curse her. 
Since her conditions were now violated, Chhaya blurted out the truth. 
In an extremely angry mood, Surya dashed off to Vishvakarma's house. 
Vishvakarma tried to cool him down. "it is all because of your exercises energy 
that this has happened, exclaimed Vishvakarma. "If you permit, I will shave off 
some of the extra energy. Then Samjna will be able to look at you." Surya 
agreed to this proposition. With the shaved off energy, Vishvakarma 
manufactured Vishnu's chakra (a weapon like a bladed discus). 
Surya found out that Samjna was in Uttara Kuru in the form of a mare. He 
joined her there in the form of a horse. As horse, they had two sons named 
Nasatya and Dasra. Since ashva means horse, the sons were also known as the 
two Ashvinish and became the physicians of the Gods. 
Surya and Samjna then gave up their equine forms and lived happily ever 
after. 
Vaivasvata Manu's ChildrenVaivasvata Manu has no children and he arranged 
for a sacrifice so that he might have a son. 
Nine sons were born as a result of this sacrifice. Their names were Ikshvaku, 
Nabhaga, Dhrishta, Sharyati, Narishyanta, Pramashu, Rishta, Karusha and 
Prishadhra. Manu also made an offering to the two Gods Mitra and Varuna. As 
a result of this offering, a daughter named Ila was born. 
Budha was the son of Chandra, and Budha and Ila had a son named Pururva. 
Subsequently, thanks to a boon conferred on her by Mitra and Varuna. Ila 
became a man named Sudyumna. 

11 
 



Sudyumna's sons were Utkala, Gaya and Vinatashva. Utkala ruled in Orissa, 
Gaya in the region that is also called Gaya, and Vinatashva in the west. 
Sudyumna was not entitled to rule since he had earlier been a woman. He 
lived in the city known as Pratishthana. Pururava inherited this later on. 
When Vaivasvata Manu died, his ten sons divided up the earth amongst 
themselves, Ikshvaku ruled in the central regions. He had a hundred sons, the 
eldest of whom was named Vikukshi. 
Vikukshi came to be known as Shashada. Thereby hangs a tale. 
Ikshvaku wanted to organize a sacrifice and he sent his son Vikukshi to the 
forest to fetch some meat for the sacrifice. While hunting for game, Vikukshi 
felt very hungry and ate up some of the meat. This was a sacrilege and the 
sage Vashishtha advised Ikshvaku to banish Vikukshi from his kingdom. 
Because the meat that he had eaten had been the meat of a rabbit (shashaka), 
Vikukshi came to be known as Shashada. 
But after Ikshvaku died, Vikukshi returned to his father's kingdom and began 
to rule there. This was the kingdom of Ayodhya. One of Vikukshi's sons was 
Kakutshta, and Rama of Ramayana fame was born in this line. 
Kubalashva Kubalashva was one of the kings descended from Kakutstha. 
Kubalashva's father was named Vrihadashva. After Vrihadashva had ruled for 
many years, he desired to retire to the forest. He therefore prepared to hand 
over the kingdom to his son Kubalashva. But learning of King Vrihadashva's 
resolve, a sage named Utanka came to meet the king. 
"Don't go to the forest right now", Utanka told the king. My hermitage 
(ashrama) is on the shores of the ocean and is surrounded by sand in all 
directions. A strong rakshasa named Dhundhu lives under the sand. He is so 
strong that even the Gods have been unable to kill him.  
Once every year, Dhundhu exhales his breath and this raises a tremendous 
cloud of sand and dust. For an entire week the sun remains shrouded in dust 
and for the whole week, there are earthquakes as a result of Dhundhu's 
exhalation. This is disturbing my mediation (tapasya) and you can't very well 

12 
 



go away to the forest without first doing something about Dhundhu. Only you 
are capable of killing him. I have accumulated a lot of power as a result of my 
tapasya and I will give this to you if you kill Dhundhu."Vrihadashva told Utanka 
that there was no need for Vrihadashva himself to kill Dhundhu. He would go 
to the forest as he had decided. His son Kubalashva was perfectly capable of 
killing Dhundhu and would accompany Utanka. 
Kubalashva and his hundred sons went to the shores of the ocean where all 
the sand was. 
Kubalashva asked his sons to start digging so that they might find Dhundhu. 
Dhundhu attacked Kubalashva's sons and killed all of them but three. The 
three who escaped were named Dridashva, Chandrashva and Kapilashva. But 
Dhundhu himself was killed by Kubalashva. As a result of this great feat, 
Kubalashva came to be known as Dhundhumara. The sage Utanka blessed 
Kubalashva and by the sage's blessings, Kubalashva's dead sons went straight 
to heaven. 
Trishanku From Dridashva was descended a king named Trayaruni. Trayaruni 
was a righteous king and followed all the religious dictates. But Trayarun's son 
Satyavrata was quite the opposite and refused to follow the righteous path. 
King Trayaruni's chief priest was the great sage Vashishtha. 
Vashishtha advised the king that his evil son should be banished from the 
kingdom. Trayaruni accepted the sage's advice. Consequently, Satyavrata 
started to live with outcasts (chandalas) outside the kingdom. 
After some time, Trayaruni relinquished his kingship and went away to the 
forest. The kingdom had no king and degenerated into anarchy. The absence 
of a king is also frowned upon by the Gods and for twelve years there was a 
terrible drought. 
Vishvamitra was another great sage. While all this was going on, Vishvamitra 
was not present in the kingdom. He had gone away to perform tapasya on the 
shores of the ocean, having left his wife and children in a hermitage (ashrama) 

13 
 



that was in the kingdom. But because there was such a long spell of drought, 
there was also famine in the kingdom. People started to starve. 
Vishvamitra's wife decided to sell her son so that she might have some food to 
eat. She tied a rope round the son's neck and took him to the market-place. 
There, she sold him in exchange for a thousand cows. Since a rope had been 
tied around the son's neck (gala), he came to be known as Galava. 
But Satyavrata discovered what terrible straits Vishvamitra's family was in. He 
freed Galava and started to take care of Vishvamitra's wife and children. 
Satyavrata had not been terribly fond of Vashishtha. He blamed the sage for 
his banishment. 
When thee was famine everywhere, Satyavrata stole Vashishtha's cow. He 
killed the cow and served the meat to Vishvamitra's sons, apart from eating it 
himself. 
Vashishtha was in a terrible rage when he got to know about this incident. He 
cursed Satyavrata. 
"You have committed three sins (shanku)," Vashishtha told Satyavrata. 
"Firstly, you have angered your father Trayaruni. Secondly, you have stolen 
and killed a cow. Thirdly, you have eaten beef, a forbidden meat. Because of 
these three sins, you will henceforth be known as Trishanku and be eternally 
cursed." (The word tri means three.)Satyavrata had however taken care of 
Vishvamitra's family when the sage was away on his meditation. After 
Vishvamitra returned, he was very happy to learn about what Trishanku had 
done and offered to grant him a boon. Trishanku desired the boon that he 
might be allowed to go to heaven in his own physical body. Thanks to 
Vishvamitra's immense powers, even this virtually impossible task was 
accomplished. Trishanku became king in Trayaruni's kingdom and Vishvamitra 
acted as his chief priest. 
Sagara Trishanku's son was Harishchandra and from Harishchandra was 
descended a king named Bahu. 

14 
 



Bahu devoted too much time to pleasurable pursuits. The upshot of this was 
that the defence of the kingdom was not properly taken care of. Enemy kings 
seized this opportunity to attack Bahu's kingdom. They drove Bahu out and 
Bahu went off to the forest with his wife Yadavi, The enemy kings who 
dislodged Bahu were led by the Haihaya and Talajangha kings. They were 
aided by the Shakas, Yavanas, Paradas, Kambojas and Pahlavas. 
King Bahu died in the forest. His wife Yadavi desired to die on her husband's 
funeral pyre. But since Yadavi was pregnant at the time, the sage Ourva 
persuaded her that such an act would be a sin. He brought Yadavi to his own 
hermitage and began to take care of her. 
Bahu had also a second wife and she had once tried to poison Yadavi. The 
poison (gara) had however done Yadavi no harm and emerged when the baby 
was born. Since the baby was born together with poison, he came to known as 
Sagara. 
The sage Ourva took care of Sagara's education. He imparted to Sagara the 
knowledge of all the shastras and also the usage of weapons. Amongst other 
things, Sagara acquired the skill of using a divine weapon known as 
agneyastra. 
When he grew up, Sagara attacked the Haihaya kings and defeated them 
through the use of agneyastra. He then defeated the Shakas, Yavanas, 
Paradas, Kambojas and Pahlavas and was about to kill them all. But these 
enemy kings fled to the sage Vashishtha for refuge and Vashishtha persuaded 
Sagara not to kill his enemies. Instead, the heads of the Shakas were half 
shaven off. The Yavanas and Kambojas had their heads completely shaven. 
The Pahlavas were instructed that they would have to keep beards. These 
enemy kings also lost all right to follow the religion laid down in the Vedas. 
Amongst the other kings who Sagara defeated were the Konasarpas, the 
Mahishakas, the Darvas, the Cholas and the Keralas. 
King Sagara had two wives. The first was named Keshini and she was the 
daughter of the king of Vidarbha. The Brahma Purana does not tell us the 

15 
 



name of the second wife but from the Mahabharataa we know that it was 
Sumati. Keshini and Sumati had no sons. They therefore began to pray to 
Ourva so that they might have sons. 
Ourva was pleased at these prayers and said, " Both of you will have sons. But 
one of you will have a single son and the other will have sixty thousand sons. 
Tell me, who wants what."Keshini asked for a single son and Sumati asked for 
sixty thousand sons. In due course, Keshini gave birth to a son named 
Panchajana. Sumati gave birth to a gourd. Inside the gourd there was a lump 
of meat. The gourd was placed inside a pot full of clarified butter (ghrita). And 
from the lump of meat were born sixty thousand sons. 
King Sagara proceeded to conquer the entire earth. As a recognition of this 
conquest, he initiated an ashvamedha yajna (horse sacrifice). In this 
ceremony, the sacrificial horse is left free to wander all over the earth. The 
sixty thousand sons accompanied the horse as its guards. The horse eventually 
reached the shores of the ocean that lies towards the south-east. While 
Sagara's sons were resting, the horse was stolen. The sons started to look for 
the horse and began to dig up the sands in their search. In this process, they 
came upon the sage Kapila. Kapila had been meditating and his meditation 
was disturbed by the terrible din that Sagara's sons made. He gazed at them in 
fury and all but four of the sons were burnt to ashes. The four sons who were 
saved were named Varhiketu, Suketu, Dharmaketu and Panchajana. 
The Brahma Purana is slightly confused here. Was Panchajana Keshini's son or 
Sumati's son? There is some inconsistency with the account given in the 
Mahabharataa. In the Mahabharataa, it is Keshini who gave birth to sixty 
thousand sons and it is Sumati who had a single son named Asamanja. Also in 
the Mahabharataa, all sixty thousand sons were burnt to ashes. 
The Brahma Purana also tells us that the sacrificial horse was obtained by 
Sagara from the ocean. 
This is the reason why the ocean is referred to as sagara. 

16 
 



To come back to the account given in the Brahma Purana. Panchajana's son 
was Amshumana and Amshumana's son was Dilipa. Dilipa had a son named 
Bhagiratha. Bhagiratha brought down the river Ganga from heaven to earth 
and thus redeemed his ancestors who had been burnt to ashes by Kapila. It 
was because of this that the river Ganga came to be known as Bhagirathi. 
From Bhagiratha was descended Raghu. Raghu's son was Aja, Aja's son 
Dasharatha and Dasharatha's son Rama. 
The Moon and the Lunar Dynasty There was a sage named Atri. Atri 
performed very difficult tapasya. So difficult was the tapasya that Atri's energy 
was thrown up into the sky. The sky could not bear this energy and hurled it 
down onto the earth. This energy then gave birth to Soma or Chandra, the 
moon God. Brahma took Chandra up into his chariot and drove the chariot 
around the earth twenty-one times. From whatever energy was left after 
Chandra has been created, the herbs were born. 
Chandra also performed very difficult tapasya. One padma year consists of 
10,000,000,000,000 normal years. For one hundred such padma years, 
Chandra mediated. After the meditation was over, Brahma appointed Chandra 
Lord over seeds, herbs, Brahmanas and the oceans. Chandra also performed a 
rajasuya yajna (royal sacrifice) as a celebration of his lordship. This gave him a 
lot pomp, glory, wealth and respect.But all this merely served to turn 
Chandra's head. The guru (teacher) of the Gods was the sage Brihaspati. 
Brihaspati had a wife named Tara and Chandra abducted Tara. Despite the 
Gods and the sages asking Chandra to return Tara, the moon God would not 
listen. A terrible war then raged over Tara, the Gods fighting for Chandra. 
Shukracharya, the guru of the demons, fought on Chandra's side and Shiva 
fought on Brihaspati's side. This war (Samgram) came to be known as 
tarakamaya samgram, since it was fought over Tara. 
Finally Brahma intervened and a truce was called. But Chandra and Tara had 
by then had a son, and Brihaspati refused to accept this son as his own. This 
son was Budha. As you already known, Budha married Ila and they had a son 
named Pururava. 

17 
 



The Brahma Purana now describes several kings belonging to the lunar 
dynasty. 
Yayati In the lunar dynasty, there was born a powerful king named Nahusha. 
He married Viraja and they had six sons named Yati, Yajati, Samyati, Ayati, 
Yati, and Suyati. Yati became a hermit. So although Yayati was not the eldest, 
he was crowned king after Nahusha. 
Yayati had two wives. The first was Devayani, daughter of Shukracharya. And 
the second was Sharmishtha, daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the 
danavas. Devayani had two sons named Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha 
had three sons named Druhya, Anu and Puru. Yayati conquered the whole 
earth and ruled over it. When he became old, he divided the earth amongst 
his five sons. Yadu was given the lands to the east, Puru the lands in the 
center, Turvasu the lands to the south and south-east, Druhya those to the 
north and Anu those to the west. 
Yayati gave up his weapons and decided to travel throughout the world. He 
called Yadu to him and said, "I wish to explore the world and my old age is a 
hindrance. Please accept my old age and give me your youth in return." Yadu 
refused. "I will not," he said. "One cannot eat well when one is old, nor can 
one pleasure the comforts of the world. Old age is not pleasant. Ask one of my 
brothers instead." Yadu's refusal angered Yayati. He cursed Yadu that he or his 
descendants would never be kings. Yayati next requested Druhya, Turvasu and 
Anu, but they too refused and were similarly cursed by their father. But Puru 
agreed to his father's request and gladly accepted the old age. He was blessed 
by his father. 
After many years had passed, Yayati got tired of the world and returned Puru's 
youth to him. He accepted back his old age and retired to the forest to 
mediate. 
From Puru was descended King Bharataa after whom the land came to be 
known as Bharataavarsha. Also in this line was King Kuru, after whom all the 

18 
 



descendants came to be known as Kauravas. The sacred place named 
Kurukshetra owes its name to King Kuru. 
From Turvasu were descended the kings of Pandya, Kerala, Kola and Chola. 
From Druhya were descended the kings of Gandhara. The horses of the 
Gandhara kingdom are famous.Yadu had five sons, Sahasrada, Payoda, 
Kroshtu, Nila and Anjika. Sahasrada's descendants were the Haihayas, 
amongst whom the most famous was Kartyavirya Arjuna. Arjuna pleased the 
sage Dattatreya and became invincible. He also had a thousand arms. Arjuna's 
greatest deeds were his defeat and imprisonment of Ravana, king of Lanks. 
Kroshtu's descendants were Vrishni and Andhaka and in the Vrishni line was 
born Krishna. 
Geography Having heard accounts of the solar and lunar dynasties, the sages 
requested Romaharshana. "Tell us a little about the geography of the world. 
What does the earth look like? What are its limits?" Romaharshana 
obligedand said-- The earth is divided into seven regions (dvipas). Their names 
are Jambudvipa, Plakshadvipa, Shalmaladvipa, Kushadvipa, Krounchadvipa, 
Shakadvipa and Pushkaradvipa. These regions are surrounded by seven 
oceans and their names are Lavana, Ikshu, Sura, Sarpi, Dadhi, Dugdha and Jala. 
Jambudvipa is in the center and right in the middle of Jambudvipa is Mount 
Sumeru. To the south of Sumeru are the mountains Himavana, Hemakuta and 
Nishadha and to the north of Sumeru are the mountains Nila, Shveta and 
Sringi. Jambudvipa itself is divided into several regions (varshas). For example, 
Sumeru is in the middle of Ilavritavarsha. Braratavarsha is to the south of 
Sumeru. To the east of Sumeru is Bhadrashvarsha and to the west is 
Ketumalavarsha. 
Harivarsha lies to the south and Ramyakavarsha to the north. Still further 
north is Hiranmayavarsha and beyond that, Uttara Kuruvarsha. 
Brahma's city is on the peak of Sumeru. It is there that the river Ganga 
descends from heaven and gets divided into four tributaries. Sita flows 

19 
 



eastwards, Chakshu westwards, Bhadra Northwards and Alakananda 
southwards into Bharataavarsha. 
There are seven major mountain range sin Bharataavarsha and their names 
are Mahendra, Malya, Sahya, Shuktimana, Riksha, Vindhya and Pariyatra. 
Bharataavarsha itself is divided into nine regions (dvipas). The names of eight 
of these regions are Indradvipa, Soumya, Gandharva and Varuna. The ninth 
region is completely surrounded by the ocean in all directions. To the east of 
Bharataavarsha live the Kiratas and to the west the Yavanas. 
Below the earth lie the seven regions of the underworld (Patala). Their names 
are Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Sutala, Talatala, Rasatala and Patala. The daityas, 
danavas and the snakes (sarpa) live there. The underworld is a wonderful 
place, more beautiful than heaven itself. The sage Narada once went on a trip 
to the underworld and was bowled over by its beauty. It is full of palaces and 
jewels. The sun rises there, but does not radiate too much of heat. The moon 
also rises, but its beams are not at all chilly. The forests are populated by 
beautiful trees and the ponds are thick with lotus flowers, the songs of cuckoo 
birds are heard everywhere. Below the underworld sleeps a great snake, 
known as Shesha or Ananta. It has a thousand hoods, all covered with jewels. 
In fact, this snake is really Vishnu in one of this various forms. 
Also part of the world are hells (naraka), presided over by Yama, the God of 
death. Those are full of weapons, fire and poisons and sinners are sent there 
to be punished. Sins that are punished by dispatch to one of the several hells 
are lying, murder, killing cows, destroying cities, drinking, killing Brahmanas, 
theft, selling wines or hair, criticizing the Vedas, insulting elders, making 
weapons, selling salt, destroying forests needlessly, killing sheep or deer, 
cheating and studying under one's own son. Each sinner receives a 
punishment that is in proportion to the severity of his sin. Of course, if one 
performs penance (prayashchitta) for one's sins, one need not go to naraka. 
The best form of penance is praying to Krishna. 
The earth (Prithivi or bhuloka) extends upto those arts of the sky that can be 
lit up by the rays of the sun and the moon. The expanse from there to the 

20 
 



solar circle is known as bhuvarloka and holy sages live there. Above the solar 
circle is the lunar circle and beyond it, in succession, come the regions of 
Mercury (Budha), Venus (Shukra), Mars (Mangala), Jupiter (Brihaspati), Saturn 
(Shani), the Great Bear constellation (saptarshi) and the Pole Star (Dhruva). 
The region from the solar circle to Dhruvaloka is known as heaven (Svarloka or 
svarga). Beyond Dhruvaloka is Maharloka and further away, Janaloka are 
Tapaloka and Satyaloka. At the end of a kalpa, all the three lokas (regions) of 
bhuloka, bhuvarloka and svarloka are destroyed. But the four lokas of 
Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapaloka and Satyaloka are not destroyed. 
Konaraka There is an ocean to the south of Bharataavarsha. One the shores of 
this great ocean there is a land named Ondra or Utkala (present Orissa). 
Utkala is populated by religious people and the Brahmanas who live there are 
learned in the Vedas. They are very good priests, learned in the Puranas and 
the shastras and skilled in the art of sacrifices. In the land of Utkala, there is an 
image of the sun (Surya) known as Konaditya. The word aditya also means the 
sun, as does the word arka. Thus, Konaditya is the same as Konarka, a 
corruption of the latter word being Konaraka. The image of Konaditys is so 
wonderful that even if one gazes at the image, all one's sins are forgiven. 
All around the temple there is sand. But nevertheless, many trees grow 
around the temple. The best time to worship the sun there is at the time of 
sunrise. One has to face the east and draw a lotus flower on the ground with 
red sandalwood. The lotus flower must have exactly eight petals. 
A copper vessel has to be placed at the center of the flower and filled with 
paddy, sesamum water, red sandalwood, red flowers and sacred grass. One 
prays to Surya to descend on the lotus flower that has thus been drawn. If one 
worships Konaditya according to these prescribed rites, the sins of seven 
preceding generations are forgiven. 
The twelve adityas are nothing but different forms of Surya. Their names are 
Indra. Dhata, Parjanya, Tvashta, Pusha Aryama, Bhaga Vivasvana, Vishnu, 
Amshumana, Varuna, and Mitra. 

21 
 



As Indra, Surya destroys the enemies of the Gods. As Dhata, he creates living 
beings. As Parjanya, he showers down rain. As Tvashta, he lives in the trees 
and herbs. As Pusha, he makes foodgrains grow. As Aryama, he is in the wind. 
As Bhaga, he is in the body of all living beings. 
As Vivasvana, he is in fire and helps to cook food. As Vishnu, he destroys the 
enemies of the Gods. As Amshumana, he is again in the wind. As Varuna, 
Surya is in the waters and as Mitra, he is in the moon and in the oceans.In 
each month of the year, it is a different aditya who shines. Indra shines in the 
month of Ashvina, Dhata in Kartika, Parjanya in Shravana, Tvashta in Falguna, 
Pusha in Pousha, Aryama in Vaishakha, Bhaga in Magha, Vivasvana in 
Jyaishtha, Vishnu in Chaitra, Amshumana in Ashada, Varuna, in Bhadra and 
Mitra in Agrahayana. Vishnu has twelve hundred rays, Aryama one thousand 
and three hundred. Vivasvana seventy-two, Amshumana fifteen, Parjanya 
seventytwo, Varuna one thousand and three hundred, Tvashta one thousand 
and one hundred, Indra two thousand and two hundred, Dhata eleven 
hundred, Mitra one thousand and Pusha nine hundred. 
Apart from the names of the twelve adityas, Surya has twelve other names as 
well. These are Aditya, Savita, Surya, Mihira, Arka, Prabhakara, Martanda, 
Bhaskara, Bhanu, Chitrabhanu, Divakara and Ravi. 
Brahma once recounted to the sages the one hundred and eight sacred names 
of Surya. The Brahma Purana lists these names and we reproduce them in 
nine groups of twelve names each. 
(1) Surya, Archana, Bhagavana, Tvashta, Pusha, Arka, Savita, Ravi, 
Gabhastimana, Aja, Kala, Mrityu. 
(2) Dhata, Prabhakara, Prithivi, Jala, Teja, Akasha, Vayu, Parayana, Soma, 
Brihaspati, Shukra, Budha. 
(3) Angaraka, Indra, Vivasvana, Diptamshu, Shuchi, Shouri, Shanaishvara, 
Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Vaishravana. 
(4) Yama, Vaidyutam, Jathara, Agni, Aindhana, Tejohpati, Dharmadhvaja, 
Vedakarta, Vedanga, Vedavahana, Krita, Treta. 

22 
 



(5) Dvapara, Kali, Sarvasurashraya, Kala, Kashtha, Muhurta, Kshapa, Yama, 
Kshana, Samvatsara, Ashvattha, Kalachakra. 
(6) Vibhavasu, Shashvata, Purusha, Yogi, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana, 
Kaladhyaksha, Prajadhyaksha, Vishvakarama, Tamonuda, Varuna, Sagara. 
(7) Amsha, Jimuta, Jivana, Ariha, Bhutashraya, Bhutapati, 
Sarvalokanamaskrita, Shrashta, Samvartaka, Vahni, Sarvadi, Alolupa. 
(8) Ananta, Kapila, Bhanu, Kamada, Sarvotamukha, Jaya, Vishala, Varada, 
Sarvabhutasevita, Mana, Suparna, Bhutadi. 
(9) Shighraga, Pranadharana, Dhanvantari, Dhumakety, Adideva, 
Aditinandana, Dvadashatma, Ravi, Daksha, Pita, Mata, Pitamaha. 
Indradyumna and Purushaottama Kshetra In Satya Yuga there was a king 
named Indradyumna. He was a very powerful king as Indra himself. He was 
handsome, honest and truthful, learned in the shastras and the Vedas, and 
skilled in the use of weapons. His radiance put the sun to shame. Indradyumna 
was devoted to Vishnu. He once decided that he would worship Vishnu. A 
tirtha is a sacred place of pilgrimage. 
Indradyumna scanned all the existing tirthas and cities. But none of them 
satisfied him. None of them, he felt, was appropriate as a place for 
worshipping Vishnu. 
Indradyumna's own capital was the city of Avanti, in the kingdom of Malva. 
Avanti was a beautiful and wealthy city, surrounded on all sides by moats and 
other fortifications. Traders from many countries came there with all sorts or 
commodities for trading. The roads of the city were lined with shopes. The 
houses were painted white. The king's stables were full of horses and 
elephants. All citizens of Avanti were pleasant of appearance and happy. 
Sacrifices were held fairly often. Many were the temples, groves and ponds in 
Avanti. Any tree that grew on earth could be found there. 
There was a temple to Shiva in the city. This was known as the temple of 
Mahakala. The image there was so sacred that worshipping Shiva in the 

23 
 



temple of Mahakala was tantamount to performing one thousand 
ashvamedha yajnas. 
The river Shipra flowed past Avanti. On the banks of the river there was a 
temple of Vishnu known as Govindasvami. Another temple to Vishnu was 
named Vikramasvami. But Indradyumna was not satisfied with these temples. 
He wanted to build another temple to Vishnu. 
He left Avanti to look for a proper place. His soldiers and subjects 
accompanied their king, so that it looked as if the entire city of Avanti was on 
the march. After traveling for many days, they arrived on the shores of the 
southern ocean, the ocean that is known as lavana samudra. 
There were so many waves in the ocean that the ocean itself seemed to be 
dancing. Marine animals lived in the ocean and the waters were also the 
source of all sorts of jewels. 
Indradyumna began to live on the shores of the ocean. He discovered a place 
near the ocean that was thick with flower and fruit trees. Many types of birds 
gathered there to eat the fruit. This was the place known as Purushaottama 
kshetra (place), the city of Puri of modern times. 
Purshottama kshetra was a very important tirtha. But all knowledge of this 
tirtha had been hidden until Indradyumna arrived on the scene. There was a 
reason for this. Many years ago, there used to be an image of Vishnu there, 
where people used to pray. So sacred was the image that all the sins of the 
worshippers were immediately forgiven. The result was that Yama could not 
punish any of the sinners. They simply prayed to Vishnu's image and escaped. 
Yama therefore prayed to Vishnu for a solution. Vishnu hid the image under 
the sand so that no one knew that it existed. 
Indradyumna liked Purushaottama Kshetra. The river Mahanadi or Chitropala 
flowed not very far away. The people who lived around the place were 
religious. He decided that this was the right place for building a temple to 
Vishnu. On an auspicious day, the foundation stone was laid. 

24 
 



Indradyumna then got in touch with the kings of Kalkinga, Utakala and 
Koshala. He requested their help in fetching stones for the building of the 
temple. The kings sent their architects to the Vindhya mountains. The stones 
were gathered from these mountains and brought to Purushaottama Kshetra 
in boats and chariots. Messengers were also sent to several other kings for 
aid. They came with their armies and with a lot of wealth.Indradyumna told 
the assembled kings, "I wish to accomplish two difficult tasks. The first is to 
perform an ashvamedha yajna here. And the second is to build a temple to 
Vishnu. Both of these are difficult jobs, particularly the second. But if you help 
me, I am confident that both jobs can be done." The kings agreed to help. 
They offered jewels, wealth, gold, clothes, food grains and other objects. The 
place where the yajna was to be held was made entirely out of gold. In fact, all 
the objects used in the yajna were made out of gold. Brahmanas from all over 
Jambudvipa came to witness the sacrifice. They were donated elephants, 
horses and cows as alms. Never has there been any other sacrifice to rival the 
one that Indradyumna performed. After the sacrifice was over and the temple 
built, there remained the more important question of the image. How was 
this to be made? Indradyumna began to pray to Vishnu for guidance. 
Vishnu appeared before Indradyumna in a dream and said, "Why are you so 
miserable? When the sun rises, go to the shores of the ocean. There you will 
find a tree. Half of the tree is in the water and the remaining half in the sand. 
Chop down this tree. It s wood will give you the material for the image. 
In the morning, Indradyumna went to the seashore and found the tree. It was 
just as Vishnu had described it to be. With an axe, he chopped down the tree. 
As he was about to slice the trunk in two, two Brahmanas appeared before 
him. Although Indradyumna did not know it, these two Brahmanas were 
Vishnu and Vishvakarma in disguise. 
"King. What have you done?" exclaimed the Brahmanas. "You have cut down 
the only tree that was on the shores of the ocean.”  

25 
 



“Forgive me," replied Indradyumna. "I wished to make an image of Vishnu. 
Vishnu has instructed me in a dream that this is the tree from which the image 
should be made.”  
“That is an excellent idea," said the Brahmana who was Vishnu in disguise. 
"There is nothing so holy as praying to Vishnu. Meet my companion. He is as 
skilled as the great Vishvakarma himself. If you want, he will build the image 
for you." King Indradyumna agreed. And instructed by Vishnu, Vishvakarma 
started to build the image. 
Or, to be more accurate, there were three different images. The first one was 
that of Baladeva or Balarama. This was completely white in colour, except for 
the eyes, which were red. The image was dressed in blue and a snake held its 
hood over Balarama's head. A club and a mace were in Balarama's hands. The 
second image was Krishna's. This was blue in colour, with eyes like lotus 
flowers. The image was dressed in yellow and had a chakra in its hand. The 
third image was that of Krishna's sister Subhadra. This image was golden in 
colour and was dressed in wonderful clothes. 
When Indradyumna discovered that the images were made in a matter of 
minutes, he was thunderstruck. He realised that the two Brahmanas cold not 
be mere mortals. He fell at their feet and said, "Please tell me who you are. 
You cannot be humans."Vishnu and Vishvakarma then revealed their true 
selves and Indradyumna was thrilled. Vishnu blessed the king and told him 
that he would rule for ten thousand and nine hundred years. And even after 
Indradyumna died, a place would be reserved for him in heaven. On an 
auspicious day, the three images were instated in the temple. 
Markandeya Many years ago, a great destruction (Pralaya) took place. The 
earth was shrouded in darkness and nothing could be seen. There was neither 
sun nor moon. Lightning and thunder crushed mountains and trees. There 
were showers of meteors. Lakes and rivers dried up. The entire earth burnt 
with fire and the flames of the fire reached down to the underworld. All living 
beings perished in this fire, including the Gods and the demons. 

26 
 



There was a sage named Markandeya. While all this was going on, 
Markandeya was busy meditating. Such was the power of Markandeya's 
tapasya that the fire dared not touch him. But it is also true that Markandeya 
was scared of the fire that raged all around him. He suffered from hunger and 
thirst and forgot all about his tapasya. His lips and throat dried up from fear. 
Markandeya discovered that there was a banyan tree that was untouched by 
all these ravages. He retired to the shade of the banyan tree and started to 
pray to Vishnu. 
Clouds gathered in the sky. They were thick and dark clouds and they spread 
all over the earth. It started to rain and it poured and poured. Water was 
everywhere and the earth was flooded. The water put out the fire. It rained 
continuously for twelve years. The oceans flooded the shores and the 
mountains were pulverised. Vishnu slept on the water. 
Markandeya did not know what to do. There was water everywhere and he 
floated on it. But he continued to pray to Vishnu. 
Vishnu spoke to Markandeya. "Do not be frightened, Markandeya," he said. 
"You are devoted to me and I shall protect you." Markandeya did not realise 
that it was Vishnu who was speaking. "Who dares to address me thus?" he 
demanded. "Am I a child that I should be so addressed? I am the great 
Markandeya, blessed by Brahma himself." But try as he might, Markandeya 
cold not see anyone anywhere. Where had the voice come from then? Had it 
all been an illusion? Not knowing what to do, he started to pray again to 
Vishnu. 
Suddenly he saw the banyan tree floating on the water. A golden bed was 
spread on the branches of the tree and on the bed there slept a small boy. 
Markandeya was exceedingly surprised to see the small boy floating in the 
middle of this deluge. He was so confused by his illusions that he did not 
realise that this boy was none other than Vishnu. 
The boy spoke to Markandeya. "You are tired," said the boy. "You are looking 
for a refuge. 

27 
 



Enter my body and rest for some time."Markandeya was so confused that, 
before he could react, he entered the boy's body through the mouth. Inside 
the boy's stomach Markandeya discovered all the worlds, the seven regions 
and the seven oceans. The mountains and the kingdoms were all there. So 
were all living beings. 
Markandeya did not know what to make of all this. He started to pray to 
Vishnu. No sooner than he had started, he came out of the boy's mouth. 
Vishnu now appeared before him and blessed him. The sage spent a thousand 
years with Vishnu. Vishnu then asked, "I wish to grant you a boon. What is 
your desire?”  
“I want to build a temple to Shiva in Purushaottama Kshetra," replied 
Markandeya. "This will prove to everyone that Vishnu and Shiva are really one 
and the same." Vishnu granted the boon and Markandeya built a temple to 
Shiva known as Bhuvaneshvara (Lord of the World). 
King Shveta In Satya Yuga there used to be a king named Shveta. He was such 
a good king that during his reign people lived for ten thousand years. No one 
dies as a child. Longevity was high and there was no infant mortality. 
But there was a sage named Kapalagoutama. Unfortunately, the sage's son 
died as an infant. The sage brought the dead body to Shveta and the king 
resolved that if he could not bring the sage's son back to life within a week, he 
would immolate himself in a fire. Having thus taken an oath, king Shveta 
worshipped Shiva with one thousand and one hundred blue lotus flowers. 
Shiva appeared before the king and granted the boon that the infant son 
might be brought back to life. 
King Shveta ruled for a thousand years. He also built a temple to Vishnu in 
Purushaottama kshetra. The temple that had been built by Indradyumna was 
known as the temple of Jagannatha. 
Shveta's temple was not very far from this and was known as the temple of 
Shvetamadhava. The image in this temple was as white as the moon. 

28 
 



Bali There was a king of the daityas named Bali. He was powerful and 
invincible. He was also righteous and truthful. The Gods cold not bear to see 
Bali's prosperity and began to plot how Bali might be foiled. So well did Bali 
rule that disease, drought and evil disappeared throughout the three worlds. 
In desperation, the Gods approached Vishnu. "Please do something about 
Bali", they requested. 
"You always help us out when we are in trouble". 
"There is no difference between Bali and the Gods so far as I am concerned," 
replied Vishnu "Bali is devoted to me. I cannot therefore fight with him. But I 
will think of a way so that his kingdom might be taken away from him and 
given to you."Vishnu decided to be born as Aditi's son. The son was a dwarf. 
This was the Vamana avatara (dwarf incarnation) of Vishnu. 
Bali proposed to organise a horse sacrifice. Many sages came to the sacrifice 
and Shukracharya was the chief priest. The dwarf also arrived to witness the 
yajna. 
Shukracharya realised that the dwarf was none other than Vishnu. He told 
Bali, "I suspect that this dwarf is Vishnu in disguise. He must have come here 
to ask you for something. Please do not grant him anything without first 
consulting me.”  
“Certainly not," replied Bali. "It is good fortune indeed that the great Vishnu 
has come to my house. What is there to consult about? I shall grant Vishnu 
whatever he wants." Bali went to the dwarf to ascertain what the dwarf 
wanted. Vishnu expressed the wish that he might be given as much of land as 
might be covered in three of the dwarf's steps. This boon Bali readily granted. 
But no sooner than the boon had been granted, the dwarf adopted a gigantic 
form. He placed one foot on Bali's yajna and the second on Brahmaloka. 
"Where will I place my third step?" demanded Vishnu. There is no more space 
left in the entire universe. Find me a place for my third step." Bali smiled and 
said, "Place it on my back." Vishnu was charmed at Bali's generosity. He 
granted Bali the boon that Bali would hold the title of Indra in a future 

29 
 



manvantara. He then appointed Bali king of the underworld. But Indra's 
kingdom of heaven, which Bali had conquered, was returned to Indra. 
Brahma had all this while been in Brahmaloka. When Vishnu placed his second 
foot on Brahmaloka, Brahma felt that he should welcome his water-pot 
(kamandalu) to wash the foot. 
The water spilled over from the foot and fell on the mountains. There the 
water divided into four. 
Vishnu accepted the flow that went northwards. The flow that went 
westwards returned to Brahma's kamandalu. The flow that went eastwards 
was gathered up by the Gods and the sages. 
But the flow that went southwards got entangled in Shiva's matted hair. This 
water was the river Ganga. 
Goutama Part of the water of the Ganga that got stuck in Shiva's hair was 
brought down to earth by Bhagiratha. The remaining part was brought down 
by the sage Goutama. 
Parvati was married to Shiva, but Shiva seemed to be fonder of Ganga than of 
Parvati. Parvati resolved that a way had to be found to remove Ganga from 
Shiva's hair. She tried persuasion, but Shiva refused to listen. 
At this time, there was a terrible drought on earth which went on for fourteen 
years. The only place that was not affected by the drought was the sage 
Gouthama's hermitage. Other people also gathered in the hermitage to save 
themselves from the drought and Goutama welcomed them all. 
Ganesha thought that he might be able to Devise a way to free his mother of 
the Ganga problem. 
He went and began to live in Gouthama's hermitage. 
Ganesha cultivated the acquaintance of the other sages and become quite 
friendly with them. 
One of Parvati's companions was Jaya. Ganesha told Jaya that she was to 
adopt the form of a cow and eat up the grain in Goutama's fields. And the 

30 
 



moment she was struck, she was to lie down on the ground and pretend to be 
dead. 
Goutama noticed that a cow was eating up his grain. He tried to drive away 
the cow by striking it with a blade of grass. As soon as he did this, the cow 
uttered a Srill bellow and fell down on the ground. Ganesha and the other 
sages came running to see what had happened. They discovered that, to all 
intents and purposes, a cow had been struck down dead by sage Goutama. 
They therefore refused to stay in an ashrama where such a sin had been 
committed. 
Goutama tried to restrain them. "Please do not go away and forsake me," he 
said. "Tell me how I may performed penance.”  
“You will have to bring down Ganga from Shiva's hair," replied Ganesh. "When 
that water touches the dead body of the cow, your sin will be forgiven.”  
“You will have to bring down Ganga from Shiva's hair," replied Ganesha. 
"When that water touches the dead body of the cow, your sin will be 
forgiven." Ganesha was so friendly with the other sages that they all accepted 
his solution. Goutama also agreed to do the needful. Accordingly, Goutama 
went to Mount Kailasa and began to pray to Shiva. Shiva was pleased at 
Goutama's tapasya and offered to grant a boon. Goutama naturally wanted 
the boon that Ganga might be brought down to earth. Shiva agreed. It was 
thus that Ganga was brought down to earth by the sage Goutama. Ganga has 
four tributaries in heaven, seven on earth and four in the underworld. Since it 
was Goutama who brought Ganga down to earth, the river is also known as 
Goutami Ganga. 
The Doves In a mountain known as Brahmagiri there used to live a hunter who 
was very cruel. He not only killed birds and animals, but Brahmanas and sages 
as well. 
The hunter once went on a hunt. He killed many animals and birds and some 
he put in his cages. 

31 
 



He had penetrated so far inside the forest that he was far from home. It 
became night and also started to rain. Hungry and thirsty, the hunter lost his 
way. He climbed up a tree and decided to spend the night there. But his mind 
kept going back to his wife and children at home. 
For many years a dove and its family had lived happily on that tree. Both the 
male and female had gone out to look for food. But although the make dove 
had returned to the nest, the female dove had not. In fact, the female had 
been captured by the hunter and was now inside a cage. The male did not 
know this. He mourned for his wife.These words of mourning were heard by 
the female dove inside the cage and she made her presence felt. The male 
dove came down and discovered his wife inside the cage. "The hunter is 
sleeping now, " he said. "Now is the time for me to free you.”  
“No," replied the female dove. "You know how it is with living beings. One 
living being lives on another. I can find not fault with the hunter, he is merely 
collecting his food. He is like a guest to us. And it is our duty to offer up our 
bodies for the sake of a guest.”  
“You are quite right," said the male dove. "I lost my sense of propriety. We 
have to serve our guest. But how do we serve our guest? We have nothing 
that we can call our own.”  
“At the moment the hunter is suffering most from the cold," replied the 
female dove. "We have to light a fire to warm him up. Go and find a fire and 
bring plenty of dead leaves and branches so that the fire may burn." The male 
dove found a flaming branch. He also brought many dry leaves and branches 
so that the fire could burn. The rain had stopped and the fire warmed up the 
hunter. 
"Now," said the female dove, "free me so that I may immolate myself in the 
fire. My roasted flesh will serve as food for the hunter.”  
“Never," replied the male dove. "It is my right to serve the guest first". 
Saying this, the male dove hurled himself into the fire. The hunter had heard 
the entire conversation and marveled that two doves could be so altruistic. 

32 
 



The female dove now requested the hunter to free her from the cage. And as 
soon as he did this, the female dove also hurled herself into the fire. 
This selfless deed of the two doves was so wonderful that a space vehicle 
(Vimana) came down to take the two doves straight to heaven. The cruel 
hunter was also impressed and repented his past misdeeds. He told the doves, 
"You are indeed blessed. Before you go to heaven, please tell me how I may 
perform penance for my sins.”  
“Go to Goutami Ganga and bathe there for fifteen days," replied the doves. 
"Your sins will also be forgiven." The hunter did as he had been asked to. The 
place where the doves immolated themselves became a holy tirtha known as 
kapotatirtha, since the word kapota means dove. 
Garuda and Maninaga You have already been told about the great snake 
(naga) Ananta. Ananta had a son named Maninaga. Garuda was the enemy of 
the snakes and the snakes were all afraid of Garuda. 
Maninaga began to pray to Shiva. Having pleased Shiva, he obtained the boon 
that Garuda would be able to do him no harm. Armed with this boon, 
Maninaga started to wander around freely and did not run away even when 
faced with Garuda. Garuda found this to be exceedingly strange. Although he 
could not kill Maninaga, he captured him and kept him imprisoned in his own 
house. 
Shiva had a companion named Nandi. Nandi told Shiva, "Lord, what has 
happened to Maninaga? We have not seen him for some time. I hope that 
Garuda has not done him some harm." Shiva of curse knew what had 
happened. He advised Nandi to pray to Vishnu. Nandi was to please Vishnu 
and then ask for the boon that Maninaga might be freed from Garuda's 
imprisonment. Nandi did this and Vishnu asked Garuda to release Maninaga. 
"Lord," Garuda told Vishnu, "this is very unfair. Other masters treat their 
servants really well. 
They give their servants gifts. See how Shiva has sent Nandi himself to rescue 
Shiva's devotee Maninaga. You never give me any gifts. Moreover, when I 

33 
 



obtain something on my own, you ask me to relinquish it. Is this proper on 
your part? It is on me that you ride when you go out to fight the demons. They 
get defeated because of my prowess. And yet it tickles your ego no end to 
think that you have defeated them yourself." Vishnu smiled and replied, 
"Garuda, you are quite right. You have become thin and learn from bearing 
my weight. It is quite true that I can defeat the demons only because of your 
prowess. 
You have a lot of strength. Why don't you bear the weight of my little finger 
and demonstrate your strength?" Vishnu placed his little finger on Garuda's 
head. So heavy was the finger that Garuda was crushed against the ground. 
"Please forgive me, said" Garuda. "I have been very stupid. I am an ignorant 
ass and you are the Lord of everything. I have been completely flattened by 
the weight of your little finger. Please tell me how I may regain my old self." 
Vishnu asked Nandi to take Garuda to Shiva. Shiva would find a way of 
restoring Garuda's old appearance. Maninaga was released and Nandi took 
Garuda to Shiva. Shiva asked Garuda to bathe in Goutami Ganga. This would 
make his appearance normal again. 
Garuda did this. Not only was his old appearance restored, he became 
stronger and swifter than he used to be. The place where Garuda bathed is a 
tirtha known as Garudatirtha. 
Vishvamitra and Indra Many years ago, there was a terrible drought. There 
was no food to be had. The sage Vishvamitra had come to the banks of the 
river Goutami Ganga with his disciples. Vishvamitra's wife, children and 
disciples were all hungry. The sage therefore sent his disciples out to look for 
food. They searched everywhere, but could find no food. The only object that 
they could find was the body of a dead dog. They brought this to 
Vishvamitra."We have no choice," Vishvamitra told his disciples. "Clean the 
meat carefully with water. Then offer it to the Gods, the sages and the 
ancestors. This is what we have to live on." Offering the meat of a dog to the 
Gods was unheard of. Indra adopted the form of a hawk and stole the vessel 
in which the meat was kept. But Vishvamitra got to know about this and got 

34 
 



ready to curse Indra. Indra was naturally scared of Vishvamitra's curse. He 
changed the dog-meat into amrita (a heavenly drink) and brought the vessel 
back. 
"I don't want amrita," Vishvamitra told Indra. "Bring the dog-meat back. I 
don't want to have amrita when the whole world is starving for food. There is 
no food available and I do not see any sin in eating dog-meat. Nor should 
there be a sin in offering it to the Gods." Indra was the God of rains. He 
realised that the only way to persuade Vishvamitra against eating the dog-
meat was to make it rain so that there would be an end to the drought. 
Instructed by Indra, the clouds poured down rain. Vishvamitra and his 
disciples now consented to partake of the amrita. 
The place where all this happened has come to be known as 
Vishvamitratirtha. 
Shveta There used to be a Brahmana named Shveta. He was a friend of the 
sage Goutama and had a hermitage on the banks of the Goutami Ganga. 
Shveta was also devoted to Shiva. In due course, Shiveta died and Yama's 
messengers arrived to take Shveta to Yama. But they could not even enter 
Shiveta's house. 
Finding that Yama's messengers ere not returning, Yama's companion Chitraka 
told Yama, "What do you think has happened? Why aren't the messengers 
returning? Yama now sent his companion Mrityu (literally death) to find out 
what was going on. Mrityu went to Shveta's house and found Yama's 
messengers standing outside the house. They explained that they were unable 
to enter the house because Shiva himself was guarding Shveta's body. One of 
Shiva's companions asked Mrityu. "What are you doing here? What do you 
want?”  
“I have come to take Shveta to Yama," replied Mrityu. "His time on earth is 
up." Mrityu flung a noose to grasp Shveta's body. But Shiva's companion 
struck Mrityu with a rod and killed him. When the news of this was taken to 
Yama, he was furious. With all his companions he attacked Shveta's house. 

35 
 



Nandi, Ganesha, Kartikeya and several of Shiva's companions came to fight on 
Shiva's side, and a battle royal raged. All the Gods arrived to mediate and end 
the strife. Things had a got a bit out of hand and Yama himself had been killed 
by Kartikeya. 
The problem seemed to defy solution. Yama was, after all, performing his 
duty. But Shiva insisted that his devotees would never be taken to Yama, but 
would instead go straight to heaven. 
Shiva's condition was finally agreed to. Nandi brought water from the 
Goutami Ganga and sprinkled it on Yama and the others who had died in the 
fighting. They were all immediately brought back to life. 
Kubera Kubera was the eldest son of the sage Vishrava. Vishrava had two 
wives. The fist wife give birth to Kubera. The second wife was a rakshasa 
(demon) woman and gave birth to Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana. 
Kubera used to rule in Lanka and his relations with his cousins were extremely 
good. But Ravana's mother did not like idea of her sons mixing so much with 
Kubera. 
She called her sons and said, "What are you up to? Why do you cause me so 
much of pain? You are demons and Kubera is a God. Is it proper that you 
should be so friendly with him? The relation between Gods and demons is one 
of enmity. Consider Kubera's pomp and glory. Have you got anything like that 
to show for yourselves? Do something so as to improve your own statures." 
Thus instructed by their mother, Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana went 
off to the forest to perform tapasya. They pleased Brahma with their prayers 
and desired the boon that they might win over the kingdom of Lanka. Ravana 
also obtained the boon that he would become very strong. 
Thus fortified with the boons, the demons attacked Kubera and defeated him. 
They drove Kubera out of Lanka. Kubera possessed a beautiful Vimana named 
pushpaka. This was also appropriated by Ravana. Ravana also made it known 
that whoever gave Kubera refuge would be killed by him. This meant that no 
one dared give refuge to Kubera. 

36 
 



Kubera sought the advice of his grandfather Pulastya. Pulastya told him to go 
to the banks of the Goutami Ganga and pray to Shiva there. Shiva appeared 
before Kubera and blessed him with the boon that Kubera would become the 
God of all wealth. 
Harishchandra In the Ikshvaku dynasty there ruled a king named 
Harishchandra. Harishchandra had no son. One day two sages named Narada 
and Parvata came to visit Harishchandra and told him that he would go to hell 
if he did not have a son. 
"How can I obtain a son?" asked Harishchandra. 
"Go to the banks of the Goutami Ganga," advised the sages. "Pray to the God 
Varuna there. We are sure that Varuna will grant you a son." Harishchandra 
pleased Varuna with his prayers and asked for a son. 
"You will have a son," said Varuna. "But there is a condition attached. You will 
have to subsequently organise a yajna in my honor and you will have to 
sacrifice your son at this yajna. 
Tell me if this condition is acceptable to you.""Yes indeed," replied 
Harishchandra. 
In due course, Harishchandra had a son who was named Rohita. 
Varuna came to Harishchandra and asked, "What about the yajna in my 
honor?”  
“My son is still too young," replied Harishchandra. "Let him at least attain ten 
days of age. Till then, the baby is in any case impure and is not fit to be 
sacrificed." After ten days Varuna came again and asked, "What about the 
yajna in my honor? "Please let him grow his teeth," replied Harishchandra. 
"Animals are sacrificed at yajnas. And no one becomes an animal until he 
actually has teeth." Varuna waited till the teeth grew and returned when 
Rohita was seven years of age. "What about the yajna in my honor?" he 
asked. 

37 
 



"These are only milk teeth," replied Harishchandra. "These do not characterise 
an animal. Please wait until his proper teeth have grown." Varuna returned 
when the proper teeth grew and asked, "What about the yajna in my honor?”  
“He is the son of kshatriya (the second of the four classes, a warrior class)," 
replied Harishchandra. "But his training in the art of fighting has not even 
begun. He cannot be called a kshatriya until he knows how to fight. Till that 
day he is an incomplete man. Do you really want such an incomplete man as a 
sacrifice?" After some years had passed, Rohita became skilled in the art of 
fighting and was appointed the heir-apparent (yuvaraja) to the kingdom. He 
was then sixteen years of age. 
Varuna appeared again and asked, "What about the yajna in my honor?" This 
time the entire conversation took place in front of the prince and Rohita 
intervened before Harishchandra could say anything. "Father," he said, "I have 
already resolved to perform a yajna in Vishnu's honor. Grant me the 
permission to complete that first. After that, do what you will." Rohita went 
off to the forest. Meanwhile, Varuna had had enough and he afflicted 
Harishchandra with a painful stomach ailment. News of his father's illness was 
taken to Rohita in the forest. In the forest, Rohita met a sage named Ajigarta. 
The sage was very poor and, together with his wife and three sons, was 
starving. 
"Will you sell one of your three sons to me?" asked Rohita. "The boy is needed 
for a sacrifice.”  
“I shall not sell my eldest son," said the sage. "My wife will not permit the 
youngest one to be sold. You can have the one in the middle. His name is 
Shunahshepa. The price will be one thousand cows, one thousand golden 
coins, one thousand pieces of clothing and a lot of wealth."Rohita paid the 
price and brought Shunahshepa home to Harishchandra. 
"We can't do this," said Harishchandra. "It is the duty of kings to protect the 
Brahmanas. How can we sacrifice the son of a Brahmana? It is better to die 
instead. Go and return Shunahshepa to his father." Just then a divine voice 

38 
 



was heard from heaven. The voice said, "There is no need for anyone to die. 
Take Shunahshepa to the banks of the Goutami Ganga and perform the yajna 
to Varuna there. Goutami Ganga is such a sacred river that no human 
sacrifices are needed if a yajna is performed there. 
This is what Harishchandra did not Varuna was satisfied. As for Shunahshepa, 
he was adopted by the sage Vishvamitra as a son. 
Vriddhagoutama The sage Goutama had a son named Vriddhagoutama. 
Vriddhagoutama was also a sage. But he was very ugly. Besides, he had no 
nose; had never had one since he had been born. He was so ashamed of this 
deformity that he could not bear to join the other children of the sages in 
studying the Vedas and Shastras under a teacher. But Vriddhagoutama knew 
some incantations (mantras) which he always chanted. He also worshipped 
the God Agni. 
When he grew a bit older, Vriddhagoutama went out to tour the world. He 
traveled to many places and met many people. Since he was deformed, he 
never got married. Who would want to marry a person so ugly as he? In the 
course of his travels, Vriddhagoutama arrived at a mountain named Shitagiri. 
He discovered a beautiful cave in the mountain and thought that this might be 
a good place to live in. So he entered the cave and was very surprised to find 
an old woman inside. The old woman had obviously been living inside the cave 
for many years. Her body was thin and wasted from the rigours of severe 
tapasya. 
Vriddhagoutama was about to touch the feet of such a venerable old woman, 
but the woman restrained him. "Please don't touch my feet," said the woman. 
"You are my guru. Does a guru ever bow before his disciple?" Vriddagoutama 
was surprised at these words. This was the first time in his life that he had met 
the old woman. "How can I be your guru?", he asked. "You are much older 
than me. Besides, I have never learnt anything and you are clearly a respected 
ascetic. Your words are a complete mystery to me.”  

39 
 



“Let me tell you my story," said the old woman. "Otherwise, you will not 
understand." There used to be a handsome and brave prince named 
Ritadhvaja. He was the son of King Arshtishena. Ritadhvaja went on a hunt to 
the forest and arrived at that very cave. There he happened to meet an apsara 
named Sushyama. The two fell in love with each other and got married. But 
eventually, Ritadhvaja had to return home and Sushyama gave birth to a 
daughter there. Sushyama left her daughter in the cave itself with the 
instruction that she was not to leave the cave. The first man to enter the cave 
would become her husband. It was this daughter who had now become the 
old woman. Ritadhvaja had reigned for eighty thousand years. After that, 
ritadhvaja's son had reigned for ten thousand years. All this while, Sushyama's 
daughter had lived in the cave, that is, for ninety thousand years all together. 
"Now you see that you are to be my husband," said the old woman. "Is a 
husband not a guru?”  
“What you say is quite impossible," replied Vriddhagoutama. "You are much 
older than me. I am only a thousand years old and you more than ninety 
thousand. How can we marry? I am like a child next to you.”  
“If you do not marry me, I will kill myself," said the old woman. 
"But I am ugly," protested Vriddhagoutama. "I will promise you this much. If I 
every become handsome and learned, I will indeed marry you.”  
“I have pleased the Goddess Sarasvati, who presides over all learning, through 
my tapasya," said the old woman. "She will make you learned. I have also 
pleased the God Varuna and he will make you handsome." Vriddhagoutama 
became handsome and learned and married the old woman. They lived 
happily in the cave. 
One day, various sages came to visit the couple. Amongst them there were 
sages like Vashishtha and Vamadeva. But there were also young sages who 
ere not all that sensible. The younger sages started to laugh at the sight of the 
young and handsome Vriddhagoutama and his aged wife. 

40 
 



"Who is this man?" they asked the old woman. "Is he your son or your 
grandson?" The sages went away, but the couple felt ashamed. They asked 
the sage Agastya what they might do. Agastya told them to go and bathe in 
the river Goutami Ganga. The river is so sacred that all one's heart's desires 
are thereby granted. The couple did this and prayed to Vishnu and Shiva. 
Wonder of wonders, the old woman became young and pretty. The place on 
the banks of the river where these wonderful things happened is a tirtha 
named Vriddhasangama. 
Pippalada Many years ago, there used to be a sage named Dadhici. His wife 
was Lopamudra. Dadhichi's hermitage was right next to the holy river Ganga. 
Lopamudra's sister Gabhastini also used to live in the hermitage. Such was the 
sage Dadhichi's powers that daityas and danavas dared not set foot inside the 
hermitage.The Gods once fought with the demons and managed to defeat 
them. After the war was over, they came to pay their respects to Dadhichi. 
Dadhichi welcomed his guests and wanted to know how they were faring. 
"Thanks to your blessings, we are fine," replied the Gods. "We have just 
defeated the demons in a war. In fact, we have a slight problem. We no longer 
need our weapons now that the demons have run away. We don't know of a 
safe place where we can store all these weapons. We were wondering if we 
might keep the weapons in your ashrama. This is one of the safest places that 
can be found." Dadhichi consented to this proposal. The Gods left their 
weapons in the hermitage and went back to heaven. 
When Lopamudra heard what Dadhichi had done, she was not at all pleased. 
"You have done something that is mot improper," she told her husband. "one 
should never accept responsibility for someone else's property, especially if 
one is an ascetic and has not material possessions of one's own. Moreover, 
you have agreed to store the weapons of the Gods. Dose this not mean that 
those who are the God's enemies will look upon you too as an enemy? And 
what are you going to do if something should happen to the weapons? Will 
the Gods not blame you then?”  

41 
 



“Your points are well taken," said Dadhichi. "But I had not thought of them 
and I have given the Gods my word. I can't very well go back on my word 
now." A hundred years passed. The Gods did not return to collect their 
weapons. The weapons began to lose their luster, Dadhichi did not know how 
the energy of the weapons might be preserved. He washed them with holy 
water and the energy of the weapons got dissolve in the water. Dadhichi then 
drank up the water. As for the weapons themselves, they faded away once 
their energy was gone. 
Finally the Gods came to claim their weapons. "Can we have our weapons 
back? They asked. 
"Our enemies have become powerful again. We need our weapons.”  
“That may be," said Dadhichi. "But the weapons are no longer there. I have 
swallowed up their energy. Let me tell you what can be done. I will use the 
powers of meditation (yoga) to give up my life. Then excellent weapons can be 
made out of my bones. 
The Gods were reluctant, but thee was no other solution. Dadhichi died and 
the Gods requested Vishvakarma to make weapons for them out of Dadhichi's 
bones. Vishvakarma complied and the weapon name vajra that he made was 
truly remarkable. 
Lopamudra was away when this incident took place. She returned and found 
that her husband had died. She was afflicted with sorrow and wished to 
immolate herself in a fire. But she happened to be pregnant at the time, so 
that this could not immediately be done.  
Once the baby was born, she killed herself after having handed over the baby 
to a pippala (fig) tree for rearing.Since the pippala tree brought up the boy, he 
came to be known as Pippalada. Chandra was the Lord over all trees. The 
trees asked Chandra for some amrita for Pippalada and Chandra obliged. 
The amrita gave Pippalada a lot of strength. 

42 
 



When Pippalada grew up, he wanted to know who his parents were and the 
trees told him the story. Pippalada blamed the Gods for his parents death and 
decided to seek revenge. The trees brought Pippalada to Chandra. 
"You are still too young," said Chandra. "First you must become learned and 
well-versed in the use of weapons. Go to the forest of dandakaranya. The river 
Goutami Ganga flows through that forest. Pray to Shiva there and I am sure 
that your wishes will be fulfilled." Pippalada pleased Shiva through his prayers. 
"What boon do you desire?" asked Shiva. 
I want the boon that I may be able to destroy the Gods," replied Pippalada. 
"I have a third eye in the middle of my forehead," said Shiva. "The day you can 
see my third eye, your wish will be granted.”  
“I have a third eye in the middle of my forehead," said Shiva. "the day you can 
see my third eye, your wish will be granted." Try as he might, Pippalada could 
not see Shiva's third eye. Pippalada therefore performed even more difficult 
tapasya for even more years. Eventually he managed to see Shiva's third eye. 
From Shiva's third eye was born a demon that looked like a mare. 
"What is your desire?" asked the demon of Pippalada. 
"Kill my enemies, the Gods," was the reply. 
The demon immediately attacked Pippalada. 
"What are you doing?" asked Pippalada. "Why are you trying to kill me? I 
asked you to kill the Gods.”  
“But your body has bee created by the Gods," replied the demon. "I will 
therefore kill you also." Pippalada ran to Shiva for deliverance. Shiva 
earmarked a region inside the forest for Pippalada. 
There the demon was not permitted to enter. Pippalada lived there, protected 
from the ravages of the demon. Meanwhile, the Gods requested Shiva to save 
them as well. Shiva persuaded Pippalada to control his anger. He convinced 
Pippalada that nothing was to be gained by killing the Gods. That would not 
bring his parents back.Pippalada agreed. But he wished to see his parents 

43 
 



once. Accordingly, Vimana descended from heaven on which Dadhichi and 
Lopamudra were seated. They blessed Pippalada and asked him to marry and 
have children. 
As for the demon, it became a river and merged with the holy Ganga. 
Nageshvara  
There was a city named Pratishthana. A king named Shurasena ruled in that 
city. Shurasena did not have any sons. After a lot of effort, a son was born to 
him. But the son happened to be a snake. The king and the queen were 
mortified at this turn of events. But they brought up their son in great secrecy. 
Not even the king's ministers and priests knew that the prince was a snake. 
When the prince grew slightly, he began to talk like a human, even though he 
was a snake. King Shurasena arranged for the prince's education. After the 
snake had become learned in the knowledge of the Vedas, he told his father, 
"Father, it is time for me to get married. If I do not have a son, I am certain to 
go to naraka." King Shurasena was very surprised to hear this. "How is that 
possible?" he asked. "Which princess will consent to marry a snake?”  
“I don't know," replied the prince. "But I do know that I have to get married. 
Other wise, I will commit suicide. There are many forms of marriage that are 
permissible. Perhaps a princess can be kidnapped and married to me." 
Shurasena called his ministers and told them, "My son Nageshvara has now 
come of age. He has also been made the heir-apparent to the kingdom. There 
is no one equal to him in bravery on earth, in heaven or in the underworld. I 
am getting old. Please arrange for Nageshvara to get married. I shall then 
relinquish my kingdom and retire to the forest." The king did not of course tell 
his ministers that Nageshvara was a snake. 
Shurasena had an aged minister. This minister reported that there was a king 
named Vijaya who ruled in the eastern part of the country. King Vijaya had 
eight sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Bhogavati and she was 
very beautiful. She would be the right match for Nageshvara. 

44 
 



The aged minister was sent as a messenger to Vijaya and the king agreed to 
the match. There was a custom amongst kshatriyas that the bride did not 
always have to be married to the bridegroom in person. She could also be 
married to the bridegroom's sword or some other weapon. The minister 
explained to King Vijaya that there were some private reasons which made it 
impossible for Nageshvara to come in person for the marriage. Bhogavati 
should be married off to Nageshvara's sword. Vijaya consented to this and the 
marriage ceremony was performed. 
The entire retinue then returned to the city of Pratishthana.But what was to 
be done now that the marriage was over? Nageshvara's mother sent a made 
to Bhogavati. The maid was to tell Bhogavati that her husband was actually a 
snake and then observe her reaction. 
The maid told Bhogavati, "Your husband is a God, but he has the form of a 
snake.”  
“That is my good fortune," replied Bhoavati. "Normally, women are married to 
men. I must have performed many good deeds in my earlier life to have been 
married to a God." Bhogavati was then brought to Nageshvara and at the sight 
of Bhogavati, Nageshvara remembered his earlier life. He used to be a snake 
(naga) in his earlier life and was a companion of Shiva's. His wife in the earlier 
life was Bhogavati. 
There had bee an occasion when Shiva had laughed at a joke of parvati's and 
Nageshvara had also laughed. This had annoyed Shiva and he had cursed 
Nageshvara that he would be born on earth as the son of a human, but in the 
form of a snake. When he went and bathed in Goutami Ganga, the period of 
the curse would be over. When Nageshvara recounted these incidents to 
Bhogavati, she also remembered her earlier life. The two went and bathed in 
the scared river and Nageshvara obtained a handsome and divine form. 
Nageshavara ruled after Shurasena's death. 
And when Nageshvara and Bhogavati died, they went back to Kailasa to live 
with Shiva. 

45 
 



On the banks of the Goutami Ganga, Nageshvara and Bhogavati built a temple 
to Shiva. This is a famous tirtha known as Nagatirtha. 
Brahma's Head Years ago, there was a war between the Gods and the demons 
and the Gods lost. The Gods came to Brahma for advice and Brahma asked 
them to pray to Shiva. 
When Shiva appeared before them, the Gods said, "The demons have 
defeated us. Please kill them and save us." Shiva went to fight with the 
demons. He drove the demons off from Mount Sumeru and out of heaven. He 
pursued them to the ends of the earth. All this exertion made Shiva sweat. 
And wherever the drops of sweat fell down on the ground, terrible ogresses 
named matris were created. The matris also started to kill the demons and 
pursued them down to the underworld. 
While the matris were killing the demons in the underworld, Brahma and the 
other dos waited on the banks of the river Goutami Ganga. This place came to 
be known as Pratishthana. 
When the matris had killed all the demons, they returned to earth and began 
to live on the banks of the Goutami Ganga. This tirtha has come to be known 
as matritirtha. 
Brahma used to have five heads. The fifth head was in the shape of a donkey's 
head. When the demons were running away to the underworld, this donkey's 
head addressed the demons and said, "why are you running away? Come back 
and fight with the Gods. I shall aid you in your fight." The Gods were alarmed 
at this paradoxical situation. Brahma was helping them in their flight with the 
demons and Brahma's fifth head was trying to help the demons. They went to 
Vishnu and said, "Please cut off Brahma's fifth head. It is causing too much of 
confusion.”  
“I can do what you want," replied Vishnu, "but there is a problem. When the 
cut-off head falls on earth, it will destroy the earth. I think you should pray to 
Shiva to find a way out." The Gods prayed to Shiva and Shiva agreed to cut off 
the head. But what was to be done with the severed head? The earth refused 

46 
 



to bear it and so did the ocean. Finally it was decided that Shiva himself would 
bear the head. 
The place where Shiva cut off Brahma's fifth head is known as rudratirtha. 
Ever since that day, Brahma has had four heads and is known as Chaturmukha 
(chatur connotes four and mukha connotes face). There is a temple to Brahma 
on the banks of the Goutami Ganga. This is a holy place known as 
Brahmatirtha. A killer of Brahmanas is pardoned his sin if he visits this temple. 
The Owl and the Dove A dove used to live on the banks of the Goutami Ganga. 
The dove's name was Anuhrada and its wife's name was Heti. Anuhrada was 
Yama's grandson. 
Not very far away, there lived an owl named Uluka. The owl's wife was called 
Uluki. The owls were descended from the God Agni. 
The doves and the owls were enemies. They fought amongst themselves 
continually. The doves had received all sorts of weapons from Yama and the 
owls had received all sorts of weapons from Agni. These divine weapons 
threatened to burn up everything. But Yama and Agni intervened. They 
persuaded the owls and the doves to forget their enmity and live together as 
friends. The place where the doves lived came to be known as a tirtha named 
yamyatirtha. And the place where the owls lived came to be known as 
Agnitirtha. 
The Hunter There was a sage named Veda. He used to pray to Shiva every day. 
The prayers lasted till the afternoon and after the prayers were over, Veda 
used to go to the nearby villages to beg alms. 
A hunter named Bhilla used to come to the forest every afternoon to hunt. 
After the hunt was over, he used to come to Shiva's linga (image) and offer to 
Shiva whatever it was that he had hunted. In the process of doing this, he 
often moved Veda's offerings out of the way. Strange though it might seem, 
Shiva was stirred by Bhilla's offerings and eagerly used to wait for it every day. 
Bhilla and Veda never met. But Veda noticed that every day his offerings lay 
scattered and a little bit of meat lay by the side. Since this always happened 

47 
 



when Veda had gone out to beg for alms, Veda did not know who was 
responsible. One day, he decided to wait in hiding so as to catch the culprit 
red-handed. 
While Veda waited, Bhilla arrived and offered what he had brought to Shiva. 
Veda was amazed to discover that Shiva himself appeared before Bhilla and 
asked, "Why are you late today? I have been waiting for you. Did you get very 
tired?" Bhilla went away after making his offerings. But Veda came up to Shiva 
and said, "What is all this? This is a cruel and evil hunter, and yet, you appear 
before him. I have been performing tapasya for so many years and you never 
appear before me. I am disgusted at this partiality. I will break your linga with 
this stone.”  
“Do it if you must," replied Shiva. "But please wait till tomorrow." Next day, 
when Veda came to present his offerings, he found traces of blood on top of 
the linga. 
He carefully washed away the traces of blood and completed his prayers. 
After some time, Bhilla also came to present his offerings and discovered 
traces of blood on top of the linga. He thought that he was in some way 
responsible for this and blamed himself for some unknown transgression. He 
picked up a sharp arrow and began to pierce his body repeatedly with this 
arrow as punishment. 
Shiva appeared before both of them and said, "Now you see the difference 
between Veda and Bhilla. Veda has given me his offerings, but Bhilla has given 
me his whole soul. That is the difference between ritual and true devotion." 
The place where Bhilla used to pray to Shiva is a famous tirtha known as 
bhillatirtha. 
Goutama and Manikundala There was a city named Bhouvana. In that city 
there lived a Brahmana named Goutama. The Brahmana had a vaishya (trader 
and agriculture caste) friend named Manikundala. 
Goutama's mother gave him a lot of ill advice. As a result of this, Goutama told 
Manikundala, "Let us go to other countries to trade and make profits.”  

48 
 



“But my father has a lot of wealth," replied Manikundala. "What is the need to 
obtain more wealth?”  
“You don't have the proper perspective," said Goutama. "A successful person 
is one who does not thrive on what is left to him by his father. He makes his 
own fortune." Manikundala was convinced by Gountama's logic. He did not 
realise that his so-called friend was out to defraud him. 
The two friends set out on their journey, Manikundala providing all the 
capital.In the course of their travels Goutama remarked, "Have you noticed 
how those who follow the path of dharma (righteousness) always suffer? They 
are neither wealthy nor happy. There seems to be no point in being 
righteous.”  
“Please don't say that," protested manikundala. "Happiness lies in following 
the path of dharma. 
Poverty and misery are inevitable, they are of no account at all." The two 
friends argued over this, but could not decide who was right. They resolved to 
have a bet. They would ask the opinions of others. And whoever lost the bet 
would surrender all his wealth to the winner. They asked many people for 
their opinions. Naturally most people said that it was the evil who thrived and 
prospered. And it was the righteous who suffered. The upshot of this was that 
Manikundala surrendered all his wealth to Goutama. But Manikundala 
continued to praise dharma. 
"You are an utter ass," said Goutama. "Haven't you lost all your wealth to me? 
Yet you continue to praise dharma.”  
“The wealth is of no account at all," replied Manikundala. "Dharma is on my 
side and your apparent victory is only an illusion. Dharma will triumph in the 
end." The two friends decided to have another bet. This time it was agreed 
that whoever lost the bet would have his two arms chopped off. They again 
asked several people and most people said that is was adharma (evil) which 
triumphed. So Manikundala lost his two arms. 
"How does it feel now?" asked Goutama. 

49 
 



"The same as ever," replied Manikundala. "What is important is dharma. And 
dharma is on my side." Goutama lost his temper at this. He threatened to cut 
off Manikundala's head if Manikundala persisted in his praise of dharma. But 
Manikundala was unperturbed. The friends decided to have another bet. This 
time it was agreed that whoever lost would forfeit his life. Manikundala lost 
yet again. And Goutama gouged out Manikundala's eyes and left him for dead. 
Manikundala lay on the banks of the Goutami Ganga and pondered about the 
fate that had befallen him. It became night. 
There was an image of Vishnu on the banks of the river and the rakshasa 
Vibhishana used to come there every night to pray to Vishnu. Vibhishana's son 
discovered Manikundala lying there and found out from him the entire story. 
He recounted the story to his father. 
"Many years ago, I had joined Rama in his fight with Ravana," Vibhishana told 
his son. 
"Ragvana's son Meghanada shot a venomous arrow at Rama's brother 
Lakshmana. Lakshmana fell unconscious. The monkey Hanuman then went to 
the Himalayas and brought a mountain named Grandhamadana to Lanka. On 
that mountain there was a wonderful herb named vishalyakarani which cures 
all illnesses. When Hanuman returned the mountain to the Himalayas, a bit of 
the vishalyakarani fell down at this spot. Near Vishnu's image. Let us try and 
find it. We should be able to cure Manikundala." Father and son hunted for 
the herb. The vishalyakarani had become a huge tree. They lopped off a 
branch and placed it on Manikundala's chest. Manikundala immediately 
regained his eyes and arms. After curing Manikundala, Vibhishana and his 
retinue returned to Lanka. 
Manikundala began to travel. He eventually came to a city named Mahapura 
where a king named Maharaja ruled. Maharaja had no sons, only a daughter. 
The daughter was blind. Maharaja had announced that whoever cured his 
daughter would become his son-in-law and rule after him. 

50 
 



Manikundala cured the princess with his knowledge of the vishalyakarani. He 
then married the princess and became king of Mahapura after Maharaja. 
Many years later, Goutama was brought before Manikundala by the soldiers. 
He had been arrested on the charge of committing a crime. Goutama had lost 
all his wealth by then and was no more than a beggar. Manikundala pardoned 
his friend and shared with him whatever he had. 
Such are the virtues of following the path of dharma. There are many tirthas 
along the banks of the Goutami Ganga where these wonderful incidents took 
place. 
Kandu There was a sage named Kandu. He had a hermitage on the banks of 
the Goutami Ganga. The ashrama was a beautiful place and Kandu performed 
very difficult tapasya there. In the summer Kandu meditated in the hot sun, in 
the monsoon he meditated on the wet ground, and in the winter he 
meditated dressed in wet clothing. 
Indra got sacred as a result of all this tapasya. He thought that the sage Kandu 
might want to become Indra the king of the Gods. He therefore called an 
apsara named disturb Kandu's tapasya." Pramalocha went to the hermitage 
and began to sing there in a beautiful voice. This disturbed Kandu and he 
discovered a beautiful woman wandering around in his ashrama. 
"Who are you?" Kandu asked the woman. 
"I have come here to pluck flowers," replied Pramalocha. "I am your servant. I 
will do whatever you wish me to." Kandu had fallen in love with Pramalocha 
and he married her. He forgot all about his tapasya and Indra heaved a sigh of 
relief. Years passed. Pramalocha wished to return to heaven, but Kandu would 
not let her. 
After years and years had passed, Kandu came out of his hut, looking rather 
distracted. It was then evening and Kandu was obviously going 
somewhere."Where are you going?" Pramalocha asked. 
"What a stupid question!" exclaimed Kandu. "Can't you see that it is now 
evening? I have got to go and observe the evening rites. The day has passed.”  

51 
 



“What day?", asked Pramalocha. "Several days have passed and several 
evenings have come and gone.”  
“No, you came here this morning," said Kandu. "I brought you to my hut and it 
is now evening, I don't understand what you are trying to say. Explain 
yourself.”  
“It is true that I came here in the morning," answered Pramalocha. "But that 
was a morning which dawned many years ago. Hundreds of years have passed 
since that day.”  
“How many years?" asked Kandu. "When did you come here?' "Sixteen 
hundred years, six months and three days ago," replied Pramalocha. 
"Are you sure?" asked Kandu. "It seems like a single day to me.”  
“I am sure," said Pramalocha. "I dare not lie to you.”  
“You have dislodged me from my tapasya," responded Kandu. "But I will not 
curse you, since you have been my wife. Go back to heaven. I have to atone 
for my sins." The sage Kandu went to Purshottama kshetra and performed 
penance for his sins. He was blessed by Vishnu. 
Kandu and Pramalocha had a daughter named Marisha. 
The Brahma Purana also describes several other tirthas. Most of these are on 
the banks of the river Goutami Ganga. This is now identified as the river 
Godavari. 
After describing these several tirthas, the text describes incidents in Krishna's 
life. These we will skip, since they are described in much greater detail in the 
other Puranas. 
VarnA Ashrama There are four varnas (classes). Their names are Brahmana, 
kshatriya, vaishya and shudra. 
The duties of a Brahmana are to donate alms, perform tapasya, worship the 
Gods, perform yajnas and study the Vedas. To earn a living, Brahmanas are 
authorized to teach and act as priests at sacrifices. The duties of kshatriya are 
to beat arms and protect the earth, donate alms and perform sacrifices. A 

52 
 



kshatriya is also permitted to study the shastras. The duties of a vaishya are 
agriculture, animal husbandry and trade. That apart, vaishyas should donate 
alms, perform sacrifices and study the shastras. The duties of a shudra are to 
serve Brahmanas. Shudras can also be shopkeepers and artisans. 
In times of emergency, a Brahmana is allowed to adopt the livelihoods of 
kshatriyas or vaishyas to earn a living. In similar fashion, a kshatriya is 
permitted to adopt the livelihoods of vaishyas or shudras and a vaishya is 
permitted to adopt the livelihoods of shudras. 
There are four ashramas (stages of life) as well. The first of these is known as 
Brahmacharya (celibate studenthood). During this period, the individual 
spends his days with his guru and studies the Vedas well. He has to serve his 
guru in proper fashion and live on alms. The next ashrama is that of Grihastha 
(householder stage). The individual now gets married and has children. He 
serves the Gods, the sages, the ancestors and guests. It is householders who 
provide alms for sages and hermits. That is the reason why the householder 
stage is so very important. 
The third ashrama is known as vanaprastha (forest-dwelling stage). The 
individual now retires to the forest and withdraws his mind from the earthly 
life. He can leave his wife in the care of his sons or take her with him. He lives 
on roots, fruits and leaves and makes a bed for himself under the trees. He is 
not permitted to shave or cut his hair and his clothes have to be made out of 
bark or skins. The final ashrama is that of sannyasa (hermithood). A hermit 
gives up all association with the world and lives alone. He grows completely 
detached. He lives alone. He gets his food through begging. He is not 
permitted to spend more than one night in a village, or more than five nights 
at a time in a city. 
The Chandala and the Brahmarakshasa A chandala is an outcast. On the 
outskirts of the city named Avanti lived a chandala. There was a temple of 
Vishnu in Avanti and the chandala was devoted to Vishnu. He was also a good 
singer. 

53 
 



Ekadashi tithi is the eleventh lunar day. Every month, on ekadashi tithi, the 
chandala would fast during the day. At night he would go to Vishnu's temple 
and sing praises of Vishnu. He never failed to observe this ritual. 
The river Kshipra (Shipra) flowed by the city of Avanti. On one particular night, 
on ekadashi tithi, the chandala went to the banks of the river to collect some 
flowers for worshipping Vishnu. 
On the banks of the river there was a tree and on that tree there lived a 
Brahmarakshasa (demon). 
As soon as the demon saw the chandala, it wished to devour him. 
"Please not tonight," said the chandala. "I have to worship Vishnu throughout 
the night. Let me go now.”  
“Not on you life," replied the demon. "I have not eaten for ten days and I am 
famished. I can't let you go.”  
“Please, " said the chandala, "let me go. I promise that I will come back once 
the prayers are over. You will then be free to do with me as you will." The 
demon let the chandala go. The chandala went to the temple. He worshipped 
Vishnu and spent the night in singing Vishnu's praises. Next day, he returned 
to the demon."I am indeed surprised," said the demon. "You are very truthful. 
You can't be a chandala. You must be a Brahmana. Answer my questions. 
What did you do all night?”  
“I stood outside Vishnu's temple and sang his praise," replied the chandala. 
"For how long have you been doing this?" asked the demon. 
"For twenty years," was the chandala's reply. 
"You have acquired a lot of punya (store of merit) through this," said the 
demon. "Please grant me one night's punya, I am sinner.”  
“No," replied the chandala. "I will not part with my punya. I have given you my 
body, eat me if you will. But the punya is mine own.”  
“Very well then,' said the demon. "Give me two hours' worth of punya. I am a 
sinner.”  

54 
 



“I have told you I will not give you any of my punya," replied the chandala. 
"But what is your sin?" The Brahmarakshasa related his story. His name was 
Somasharma and he was the son of Devasharma. Devasharma was a righteous 
Brahmana. But Somasharma fell into evil ways. A Brahmana is not authorised 
to act as a priest in a sacrifice before he has had his sacred-thread ceremony 
(upanayana). But Somasharma became a priest at a yajna even though his 
upanayana had not been held. As a result of this sin, when he died, he became 
a demon. The chandala was stirred to pity at this sad story and parted with 
some of his punya. The demon was delighted and expressed his gratitude. He 
went to a tirtha and performed penance. Thus it was that the demon was 
freed. 
What about the chandala? He returned home and then left for a tour of all the 
sacred places of pilgrimage. At one such tirtha. He remembered the story of 
his earlier life. 
He used to be a hermit well-versed in the Vedas and the shastras. He used to 
beg alms for a living.  
Once he had obtained some alms. But some thieves were then in the process 
of stealing cows, and the hooves of the cows raised a cloud of dust. The dust 
fell onto the food and the hermit threw away the alms in disgust. Since he had 
thrown away alms, he was born as a chandala. After performing penance for 
this sin, the chandala was pardoned. 
Yoga The word yoga means union. Yoga is thus a form of meditation that 
unites the human soul (atman) with the divine soul (Paramatman), or 
equivalently, with the divine essence (Brahman). 
A practitioner of yoga has to study the Puranas, the Vedas and history He has 
to exercise restraint regarding the sort of food he eats. The best forms of food 
are yoghurt fruits, roots and milk. Yoga should be practiced in a place that is 
pleasant. It should not be too hot or too cold there. Nor should there be any 
noise to distract the practitioner. 

55 
 



Yoga has to be performed in a proper posture (asana). The practitioner 
concentrates the entire focus of his mind on the tip of his nose. He 
contemplates the form of Brahmana. This can only be successful if one is 
detached and controls one's senses completely. 
If yoga is performed properly, there comes the knowledge that the same 
Paramatman is in all living beings. To think that living beings are distinct from 
one another is only to fall prey to one's illusions. All the elements have the 
same Paramatman in them. 
Epilogue Romaharshana said to the sages who had assembled in 
naimisharanya, "Many years ago, the great Veda Vyasa had recited the adi 
Purana to sages. The sages had been delighted to learn the wisdom that was 
in the great Brahma Purana. Whatever Veda Vyasa had told those sages, I 
have now recited before you. Everyone should listen to a recital of this 
Purana, be he a householder or a hermit." A Brahmana who listens to a recital 
of the Brahma Purana becomes learned, a kshatriya becomes victorious, a 
vaishya becomes rich and a shudra achieves happiness. One who listens to the 
recital faithfully attains all his wishes. The fruits of listening to such a recital 
are superior to visiting the most holy of tirthas or performing the most 
difficult of yajnas. 
Romaharshana blessed the sages and returned to his own hermitage, with the 
express injunction that the secrets of the Purana should never be divulged to 
atheists who did not believe in God. 
 
  

56 
 



2. PADMA PURANA  
SRISHTI-KHAND – ‘Creation section’ 
Having revealed the contents of all the Puranas to his son Ugrashrava, Sage 
Lomaharshan instructed him to go to 'Naimisharanya' and spread it among the 
sages doing penance over there. 
There is an interesting tale how this sacrosanct forest of Naimish derived its 
name - 
Once, the sages sought Lord Vishnu's help in finding a suitable place, where 
they could perform their religious activities unhindered. Lord Vishnu released 
his chakra and instructed them to follow it. 'This chakra had many 
circumferences (Nemi) and all of you can commence your penance at the 
place where one of them gets detached from the chakra' ---said Lord Vishnu. 
The Sages followed the chakra as per the instruction of Lord Vishnu.  
Once of the circumferences of chakra got detached and fell at a place called 
Gangavarta. In course of time this particular place was famous as 'Naimish' 
because the term 'Nemi' in Sanskrit means circumference. When Ugrashrava 
who was popularly known as 'Suta' reached 'Naimisharnya' all the sages 
received him with enlighten all the sages on the divine tales of Padma Purana. 
Suta replied--- Padma Purana consists of five sections and fifty-five thousand 
shlokas. The names of these sections are Srishti-Khand, Bhumi-Khand, Swarg 
Khand, Patal Khand and Uttam-Khand. The tales of Padma Purana praise the 
glory of Lord Vishnu. These tales were narrated to Lord Brahma by Lord 
Vishnu himself, who in turn propagated them in this world through various 
sages. 
THE BEGINNING OF CREATION  
The Sages requested Suta to narrate about the incident when sage Pulastya 
had met Bhishma. 

57 
 



Suta replied--- Bhishma was doing penance at a place called Gangadwar. Being 
pleased by his austere penance, Lord Brahma instructed Pulastya to go to 
Gangadwar and bless Bhishma. 
After reaching there, Pulastya told Bhishma that Lord Brahma was pleased by 
his penance. 'Ask any boon you wish for' said Pulastya. Bhishma thanked his 
good fortune of getting a chance to meet Sage Pulastya. He requested 
Pulastya to reveal how Lord Brahma had created the world. 
Pulastya replied--- During the initial phase of his creation, Lord Brahma 
created the Mahattatva first of all. After that he created the three types of 
Ego from the Mahattatva---Satva, Rajas and Tamas. These three types of Ego 
are the origins of all the five sense-organs, organs of action and all the five 
basic elements--space, water, fire, air and earth. 
An enormous egg came into existence with the permutation and combination 
of these five basic elements. Within this egg exists the whole universe 
including the mountains, islands, oceans, planets, deities, demons and the 
human beings. The layers of water, fire, air, space and darkness envelop this 
enormous egg. These elements are once again covered by the 'Mahattatva', 
which in turn is enveloped by the 'Prakriti' (nature). Lord Vishnu himself does 
creation in the form of Lord Brahma and also takes various incarnations to 
protect the mankind. At the end of the Kalpa, it is only He, who annihilates in 
the form of Rudra. After the end of Kalpa, he takes rest on the back of 
Sheshnag for the full period of deluge. 
BRAHMA'S LIFESPAN AND CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER OF THE 'ERAS'  
Pulastya says---Lord Brahma, the embodiment of Lord Vishnu has a lifespan of 
one hundred years. His lifespan is also called 'Par', and half of its period is 
known as 'Parardha'. One 'Kashtha' consists of 15 Nimesha while a Kala 
consists of 30 'Kashthas'. A muhurta consists of 30 Kalas. 
The periods of 30 muhurtas are equal to one day and Night of the human 
beings. A month of this world is equivalent to 30 days and nights. Six months 

58 
 



make an 'Ayan' and a year consists of two 'Ayans'. These two 'Ayans' are also 
known by two other names---Dakshainayan and Uttarayan. 
Dakshainayan is the night of the deities where as Uttarayan is their day. Four 
yugas are equivalent to twelve thousand years of the deities, which occur in a 
cyclic order-- -Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga and Kali Yuga. The periods 
of these yugas are as follows--- Satya Yuga- 4000 years. Treta Yuga - 3000 
years. Dwapar Yuga- 2000 years. Kali Yuga- 1000 years. Total - 10,000 years. 
Each yuga is followed by the hibernation periods of Sandhya and Sandhyansh, 
which are as follows—Sandhya, Sandhyansh Satya Yuga 400, 400. Treta Yuga 
300, 300. Dwapar Yuga 200, 200. Kali Yuga 100, 100. Total 1000 years 1000 
years. 
Four yuga are collectively known as 'Chaturyuga'. A Brahma's day consists of 
one-thousand such 'Chaturyugas'. Altogether, fourteen Manu appear during 
this whole period of 1000 Chaturgas or in other words a day of Lord Brahma. 
Each 'Manvantar' is named after a Manu and is equivalent to little more than 
71 Chaturyugas. It also has its own Indra, SaptaRishis and other deities. This 
way, a manvantar is also equivalent to 8,52,000 years of the deities or divine 
years. Going by the standard of the years of this world a manvantar is 
equivalent to 30,67,20,000 years. On the basis of the years of this world, a 
Brahma's day is equivalent to 30,67,20,000 x 14 = 4,29,40,80,000 years. This is 
the period after which a Brahma's day is over and a deluge takes place when 
all the three worlds becomes devoid of life due to unbearable heat. Lord 
Brahma then takes rest for the same period (4,29,40,80,000 years) which is his 
night. 
After the night is over, Lord Brahma again commences his creation. So, this 
process continues for the whole period of Brahma's life span, i.e. 100 years." 
Bhisma requested Sage Pulastya to describe how Lord Brahma created life in 
the beginning of the present Kalpa. 
Pulastya replied--- At the end of the previous kalpa when Lord Brahma 
awakened from his sleep, he found the whole earth submerged in water. He 

59 
 



meditated on Lord Vishnu, who took the incarnation of Varaha and retrieved 
the earth and established it in its original position. Lord Brahma then created 
all the four worlds--Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Swargloka and Maharloka and 
divided the earth into seven islands. 
First of all, Lord Brahma created the 'Mahattatva'. After that he created the 
'Tanmatras', Indriyas (sense-organs), the immovable things like mountains, 
rivers, animals, deities, demons, human beings etc. 
THE FOUR PROMINENT CASTES  
On being asked by Bhishma about the origin of the four prominent castes, 
Sage Pulastya said--- Lord Brahma created the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas 
from his mouth and chest respectively. 
Similarly, Vaishyas and Shudras manifested from Lord Brahma's thigh and feet 
respectively.Lord Brahma had created his 'manasputras' with the objective of 
increasing the population and their names were Bhrigu, Pulah, Kratu, Angira, 
Marichi, Daksha, Atri and Vashishtha. But all of them were free from worldly 
desires and extremely virtuous. Seeing his effort go in vain, Lord Brahma 
became furious, as a result of which Rudra manifested from his forehead. Half 
of Rudra's body resembled like a male while the remaining half appeared like 
a female. Lord Brahma instructed Rudra to detach the female form from his 
body and commence copulative creation. Following his advice, Rudra 
detached the female part of his body and created eleven male entities. 
Similarly he created various female entities from the female part of his body. 
This way, the first human pair- Manu and Shatarupa came into existence. In 
course of time four children were born to them---Priyavrata, Uttanpad, Prasuti 
and Akuti. Prasuti was married to Daksha Prajpati, while Akuti became the 
wife of Ruchi Prajapati. Prasuti gave birth to 24 daughters-- Shradha, Lakshmi, 
Dhriti, Pushti, Tushti, Medha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapu, Shanti, Keerti, Khyati, 
Sati, Sambhuti, Smriti, Preeti, Kshama, Santati, Ansuya, Urja, Swaha and 
Swadha. Out of them, the former thirteen were the wives of Dharma and the 
rest were married to various sages like Bhrigu, Shiva, Marichi, Angira, myself 

60 
 



(Pulastya), Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, Vashishtha, Agni, etc. Shradha gave birth to 
'Kam', Lakshmi to 'Darpa, Dhriti to Niyam, Tushti to Santosh, Pushti to Lobha, 
Medha to Shrut, Kriya to Dand, Nay and Vinay, Buddhi to Bodh, Lajja to Vinay, 
Vapu to Vyavasay, Shanti to Kshama, Siddhi to Sukh and Keerti gave birth to 
Yash. All of them were the sons of Dharma. 
Kam had a son named Harsh from his wife Nandi, Bhrigu's wife Khyati gave 
birth to a daughter named Lakshmi--the consort of Lord Vishnu. Lord Rudra 
accepted Sati--the daughter of Daksha Prajapati as his wife. Hinsa was the 
wife of Adharm and gave birth to Anrit and Nikriti. Anrit had two sons---Maya 
and Narak, while Nikriti had two daughters--Maya and Vedana. Maya married 
Maya while Vedana became the wife of Narak. Maya had a son named Mrityu-
-the Lord of death and Vedana gave birth to Dukh. Five children were born to 
Mrityu--Vyadhi, Jara, Shok, Trishna and Krodha. All of them were celibates and 
had no progeny. 
THE MANIFESTATION OF GODDESS LAKSHMI  
Bhisma expressed his desire to know about the manifestation of Goddess 
Lakshmi. 
Pulastya replied--  
Once, after being defeated by the demons, the deities went to Lord Vishnu 
and sought his help. Lord Vishnu instructed them to collect all the medicinal 
herbs, and put them in the Ksheersagar, so that after the churning of the 
ocean ambrosia could be retrieved.Lord Vishnu also advised them to use the 
Mandar mountain as a Churner and the serpent--Sheshnag as a rope for 
churning the ocean.The deities then reached an agreement with the demons 
according to which both the groups were supposed to unitedly churn the 
ocean. The great Mandar mountain was uprooted and placed on the back of 
the tortoise--the embodiment of Lord Vishnu. Sheshnag coiled around that 
mountain and both the ends were held by the demons and the deities 
respectively. The deities intelligently chose the tail-end, while the demons in 
their foolishness chose the mouth-end. The venom spilled by Sheshnag 

61 
 



destroyed the power and strength off the demons. When the process of 
Churning began, the first thing to emerge from the sea-bed was Kamdhenu--
the holy cow. The deities claimed the ownership of this divine cow. 
Subsequently, Varuni (intoxicating drink) emerged from the sea-bed, which 
was claimed by the ignorant demons. During the process of ocean-churning, 
various kinds of things emerged out from the ocean--Parijat, sixty crore 
apsaras, the moon and Kalkut (poison), which were distributed among the 
demons and the deities. Lord Mahadeva drank the Kalkut when he saw that 
there was no taker for it. 
The churning of ocean also resulted into the manifestation of ambrosia-pot, 
Uchchaishrava (horse) and Airavat (elephant). Ultimately, Goddess Lakshmi 
manifested herself, seated on a lotus. The deities eulogised her by chanting 
the mantras of Sri Sukta. The deities were desirous of having Goddess Lakshmi 
on their side, so were the demons, but Lord Brahma instructed Vishnu to 
accept her as his consort. The demons became furious and snatched the 
ambrosia-pot from the hands of Sage Dhanvantari. Lord Vishnu then disguised 
himself as the most enchanting woman and fooled the demons into giving 
back the ambrosia-pot. Lord Vishnu gave the pot to the deities who became 
immortal after drinking ambrosia. A tremendous battle was fought between 
the demons and the deities. But, the demons were defeated in this battle and 
fled to the netherworld to protect their lives. The deities eulogised Lord 
Vishnu and returned to heaven. 
SATI GIVES UP HER LIFE  
On being enquired by Bhisma about the reason why Sati gave up her life, Sage 
Pulastya narrated the following tale ---  
Once, Daksha Prajapati had organised a grand yagya in which he had invited 
everybody except Lord Shiva. This Yagya was presided over by four prominent 
sages---Vashishtha, Angika, Brihaspati and Narada. Sati went to attend the 
yagya despite Lord Shiva's reluctance to send her. 

62 
 



After reaching there she asked Daksha about the reason why he had not 
invited Lord Shiva. 
Daksha said---"Your husband is unworthy of being in the company of other 
deities, because of his abhorrent appearance. He smears ashes on his body 
and wanders through the cremation grounds. In the name of clothes, your 
husband puts on tiger's skin. A garland of skulls keep on hanging down his 
neck. All species of serpents coil around his body. Do you think he is eligible to 
sit in the company of the deities? Your husband had brought great shame on 
me and this is the reason why I did not invite him." Sati could no more listen 
to her husband's criticism and gave up her life by jumping into the oblation-
fire.When the news of Sati's death reached Lord Shiva, he became extremely 
furious and sent his ganas to avenge her death. The Ganas went and created 
havoc at the oblationsite.After the death of Sati, Lord Shiva became a recluse 
and lost all interest in his life. His mind was preoccupied by nothing else but 
the thoughts of her beloved.One day, Sage Narada informed Lord Shiva about 
Sati's rebirth as the daughter of Himvan and Mena. Lord Shiva became 
extremely pleased by this good news. Eventually, he reunited with her eternal 
consort Parvati. 
THE ORIGIN OF DEITIES, DEMONS and SERPENTS  
Bhisma requested Sage Pulastya to explain how different entities like the 
deities, demons and serpents came into being. Pulastya replied---Having failed 
in his repeated attempts of increasing population by the means of 'sankalpa' 
Daksha Prajapati was left with no option but to take the help of copulative 
creation. 
He begot sixty daughters from his wife named Virini. In course of time ten of 
them were married to Dharma whose names were---Arundhati, Vasu, Jami, 
Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya and Vishwa.Vishwa 
gave birth to Vishwadeva, while Sadhya was the mother of Sadhya. Marutvati 
gave birth to Marutvan. Vasu had eight sons who became famous as the 
Vasus---yourself (Bhisma), Dhruva, Soma, Dhar, Anil, Anal, Pratyush and 
Prabhas. Bhanu had a son by the same name i.e. Bhanu. Mahurta begot 

63 
 



deities, who were the lords of auspicious moments. Lamba gave birth to 
Ghosh while Jami had a daughter named Nagvithi. Arundhati became the 
mother of all the creatures of this world. As far as the offspring of eight Vasus 
are concerned, 'you' (Bhisma) have four sons--Shant, Vaitand, Samb and 
Munibabhru. Dhruva had a son named Kal. While Soma was the father of 
Varcha. Dhar had two sons--Dravin and Havyavah. Anil had three sons--- Pran, 
Raman and Shishir. Anal also had three sons---Shakh, Upshakh and 
Naigameya. Pratyush had a son named Deval, who later on became a famous 
sage. 
Prabhas was the father of Prajapati Vishwakarma--the architect of the deities. 
The names of the eleven Rudras are---Ajaikpad, Ahirbudhnya, Virupaksh, 
Raivat, Har, Bahuroop, Trayambak, Savitra, Jayant, Pinaki and Aparajit. All of 
them are said to be the lords of the Ganas and have all together 84 crore 
progenies known as the Rudraganas. 
Sage Kashyapa had thirteen wives---Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Sursa, Surabhi, 
Vinta, Tamra, Krodhvasha, Ira, Kadru, Khasa and Muni. Kashyapa had two sons 
from Diti---Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha. Hiranyakashipu had four sons---
Prahlada, Anuhlad, Sanhlad and Hlad. 
Prahlada also had four sons---One of them was Virochan. Virochan was the 
father of Bali. 
Banasur, who had one thousand arms, was the eldest son of Bali.Hiranyaksha 
had four sons, who themselves had 27 crore sons and grandsons in all. 
Kashyapa had begotten one hundred sons from Danu, among whom 
Viprachitti was the most powerful.Viprachitti had fourteen sons from Sinhika--
-Sainhikeya (Rahu), Kansa, Shankh, Nala, Vatapi, Ilwal, Namuchi, Khasrima, 
Anjan, Narak, Kalnabh, Parmanu, Kalpavirya and Dhanuvanshavivardhan. 
Kashyapa also had six daughters from Tamra--Shuki, Shyeni, Bhasi, Gridhi, 
Sugridhi and Shuchi. All six of them gave birth to various species of birds. 
Shuki was the mother of Parrots and Owls. Shyeni gave birth to hawks while 
Bhasi was the mother of ospreys (a large fish eating birds.) Gridhi gave birth to 

64 
 



Vultures and Sugridhi was the mother of pigeons. Shuchi was the mother of 
cranes, Swans and other similar aquatic birds. Vinita was the mother of 
Garuda and Arun---Supreme among birds. Arun was the father of Sampati and 
Jatayu. Sursa was the mother of the serpents and had given birth to one 
thousand snakes. Similarly, Kadru gave birth to one thousand cobras.Surabhi, 
one of the thirteen wives of Kashyapa had given birth to cows, buffaloes as 
well as beautiful women. Muni was the mother of the celestial damsels --
apsaras. 
Arishta gave birth to Kinnars and Gandharvas. Ira was the mother of various 
vegetation like grass, trees, creepers and bushes. Khasa gave birth to crore of 
Rakshashas (monsters) and Yakshas.Kashyapa had also begotten forty-nine 
Marudganas from Diti. 
THE ORIGIN OF MARUDGANAS  
Bhisma requested Sage Pulastya to describe how all the Marudganas came 
into existence.Pulastya replied--- All the sons and grandsons of Diti had 
perished in the battle fought between the deities and demons. Diti---the 
mother of daityas (demons) wanted to take revenge, so she started doing a 
penance at the bank of river Saraswati, which lasted for 100 years.Being 
pleased by her austere penance Sage Kashyapa arrived and expressed his 
desire to bless her with a boon. 
Diti wanted a mighty son who could kill Indra. Sage Kashyapa then implanted 
his sperms in Diti's womb and instructed her to remain there (where she had 
been doing penance) for 100 years. He also instructed her on various do's and 
don'ts which a pregnant woman is expected to observe. Diti agreed to follow 
his instructions.Mean while, Indra got wind of her pregnancy and became 
scared. He wanted to destroy the foetus at any cost, so he arrived at the place 
where Diti was staying. He had disguised himself to avoid being recognized by 
Diti. He engaged himself in her servitude, waiting for an opportune moment 
to destroy the foetus. 

65 
 



This way, ninety-nine years had passed and only three days were remaining 
after which Diti was expected to give birth to a son. As the inevitable day 
approached nearer, Indra started becoming restless. One day, Diti was very 
tired and fell down asleep. Her hair was untied and her head had stooped 
down while she was sleeping, just opposite to the instructions Kashyapa had 
given to her. Finding the moment opportune, Indra entered into Diti's womb 
and cut the foetus into seven pieces with his Vajra. The seven fragments of 
foetus instantaneously got transformed into seven infants and started wailing. 
Indra became furious and once again he attacked them with his vajra and 
severed them into seven pieces each. But to Indra's sheer amazement, there 
were 49 infants, all wailing loudly. He tried to stop them from crying by 
shouting 'Marud' (don't cry), but to no avail. 
Indra realized that the infants had attained immortality on account of the 
'Pournamasi Vrata', which Diti had devoutly observed during the course of her 
penance. Indra named the infants as Marudganas and blessed them. He then 
begged for Diti's forgiveness and took her along with the Marudganas to 
heaven. The Marudganas, despite being born in the clans of demons, never 
associated with them and hence were revered even by the deities.Bhisma 
expressed his curiosity to know about the detailed description of all the 
fourteen manvantars. Pulastya said--The first manvantar was called 
Swayambhuva, named after Swayambhuva- Manu. Yamya was the prominent 
deity of this manvantar. Marichi and other six prominent sages were the 
SaptaRishis of this manvantar. Swayambhuva Manu had ten sons---Aghnigha, 
Agnibahu, Vibhu, Savan, Jyotishman, Dyutiman, Havya, Medha, Medhatithi 
and Vasu. 
The second manvantar was named after Swarochish Manu. Swarochish Manu 
had four sons-- Nabh, Nabhasya, Prasriti and Bhavan. Tushit was the 
prominent deity of this second manvantar. 
Dattatreya, Atri, Chyavan, Stanba, Pran, Kashyapa and Brihaspati were the 
saptaRishis of this manvantar. 

66 
 



The third manvantar was called Autam and derived its name from Autami 
Manu, who had ten sons--Isha, Urj, Tanuj, Shuchi, Shukra, Madhu, Madhav, 
Nabhasya, Nabh and Saha, Bhanusangyak was the prominent deity of this 
manvantar. Sage Urj and other six sages were the saptaRishis then. 
The fourth manvantar was called Tamas--named after Tamas Manu, who also 
had ten sons like his predecessor. The names of his sons were--Akalmash, 
Tapodhanva, Tapomool, Tapodhan, Taporashi, Tapasya, Sutapasya, Parantap, 
Tapobhagi and Tapoyogi. Kavi, Prithu, Agni, Akapi, Kapi, Janya and Dhama 
were the SaptaRishis of this manvantar, while Sadhyagana was the prominent 
deity. 
The fifth manvantar was called Raivat--named after Raivat Manu, who had ten 
sons as well-- Varuna, Tatvadarshi, chitiman, Havyap, Kavi, Mukt, Nirutsuk, 
Satva, Vimoh and Prakashak, Bhutraja and Prakriti were the two prominent 
deities of this manvantar and the names of the saptaRishis were--Devabahu, 
Subahu, Parjanya, Somap, Muni, Hiranyaroma and Saptashva. 
Next arrived the sixth manvantar---Chakshush. This Manvantar derived its 
name from Chakshush Manu, who had ten sons and among whom Ruru was 
the most prominent one. Lekh, Ribhu, Prithagbhoot, Varimool and Divau were 
the prominent deities of this manvantar. The names of SaptaRishis were--
Bhrigu, Sudhama, Viraj, Vishnu, Narada, Vivaswan and Abhimani. 
The present manvantar, which is the seventh in order, is called Vaivaswat. The 
SaptaRishis of this manvantar are---Atri, Vashishtha, Kashyapa, Gautam yogi, 
Bhardwaj, Vishwamitra and Jamdagni. 
The eighth manvantar will be called Savarnya and will be named after Savarni 
Manu, Savarni Manu will have ten sons---Dhriti, Variyan, Yavasu, Suvarna, 
Dhrishti, Charishnu, Adya, Sumati, Vasu and Shukra. The SaptaRishis of this 
manvantar will be--Ashwatthama, RishyaSringa, Kaushikya, Galav, Shatanand, 
Kashyap and Parashurama. 
The ninth manvantar will be named after Ruchi--Manu and will be called 
Rauchya manvantar. 

67 
 



Ruchi Manu will have a son named Rauchya. 
The tenth manvantar will be called Bhautya and will derive its name from 
Bhautya Manu--son of Bhuti. 
The eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth manvantars will be named 
after Merusavarni, Ribhu, Veetdhama and Vishkvasen Manus respectively. All 
these fourteen Manus successively rule this world for the total period of 1000 
Chaturyugas. At the end of Kalpa each of them unite with Lord Brahma. 
KING PRITHU AND THE SURYA DYNASTY  
Bhisma enquired Sage Pulastya about the mighty King Prithu upon whom the 
earth was named as Prithvi. 
Sage Pulastya replied---Anga-Prajapati was the descendant of Swayambhuva 
Manu and Sunitha was his wife. In course of time, Sunitha gave birth to a son, 
who was named Vena. After growing up, Vena turned out to be an extremely 
irreligious person and used to spend his time committing all sorts of immoral 
deeds. The sages tried to bring him to the virtuous path but to no avail. They 
became furious and cursed Vena as the result of which he died. The sages 
then churned his dead body, which resulted into the manifestation of a mean 
caste called Mlechchha. They kept on churning his body and in the process, an 
extremely virtuous entity manifested from the right hand of Vena. He held 
various weapons like mace, bow and arrows in his hands. He was none other 
than Prithu, the embodiment of Lord Vishnu. 
After being crowned as a king, Prithu was saddened to see the prevalence of 
immorality throughout the length and breadth of earth. The lack of virtuosity 
and religiousness among the inhabitants of earth made him extremely furious. 
He decided to destroy the earth. The earth became scared and fled in the 
guise of a cow. Prithu chased her wherever she went. At last, the cow halted 
at a place as she had got tired. To save her life, the cow agreed to fulfill all the 
desires of Prithu. Prithu then milked the cow, which later on got transformed 
into cereals. Similarly all the deities, ancestors and other human-beings milked 
the cow and received numerous invaluable things. 

68 
 



Prithu was a just king. Peace and prosperity prevailed during his reign. People 
were religious and free from any kind of sorrow. The earth is named after him 
as Prithvi.Sage Pulastya then went on to give a detailed description of Surya 
dynasty---Vivaswan (Surya) had three queens---Sangya, Ragyi and Prabha. 
Ragyi had a son named Raivat while Somgya was the mother of Vaivaswat-- 
Manu, Yama and Yamuna.  
Once, Sangya being unable to bear the extreme radiance of Surya created a 
superficial entity from her body and instructed her to act as Surya's wife in her 
absence. 
The name of this superficial woman was chhaya, who had two sons and two 
daughters from Surya. The names of her sons were Savarna--Manu and 
Shanaishchar, while the names of her daughters were Tapti and Vishti. 
Shanaishchar became immortal as a planet while Yamuna and Tapti became 
rivers. Vaivaswat Manu had ten sons among whom 'Ila' was the eldest. After 
appointing Ila as his successor, Vaivaswat, manu went to do penance. 
Once, Ila transformed into a woman after tresspassing a forest where Lord 
Shiva and Parvati were enjoying privacy. It was Lord Shiva's curse that any 
male who ventured in to that forbidden forest would become a woman. Later 
on, Buddh became enchanted by Ila's beauty and married her. 
Meanwhile, when Ila did not return to his kingdom, his brother Ikshvaku went 
in search of him. 
Ikshvaku reached the outskirts of the same forest but did not enter it. He 
managed to please Shiva by his devotion. When Lord Shiva appeared, 
Ikshvaku requested him to make Ila a man once again. Shiva told him that it 
was impossible but assured him by saying "If you perform an Ashwamedha 
Yagya and donate all the virtue thus acquired to me, then your brother will be 
able to live as a man for one month. But, after one month he will again 
become a woman. Thus, his form will keep on changing every alternate 
months." Meanwhile Ila gave birth to four sons among whom Utkal, Gaya and 

69 
 



Haritashwa were prominent. This way, Ila became the source from which the 
lineage of chandra sprouted. 
Ikshvaku ruled over Madhya-desh. He had one hundred sons, all of whom 
ruled the territories situated north of Meru Mountain. Ikshvaku also had one 
hundred and fourteen more sons, who ruled over the areas situated south of 
Meru. Kakusttha was Ikshvaku's grand-son. Kakusttha had a son named 
Suyodhan. Some other prominent kings coming from this lineage were--
Prithu, Vrihadashwa, Kuwalashva, Purukutsu, Dharmasetu, Muchukund, 
Tridhanva, Traidharun, Satyavrat and Satyarath. The most truthful king 
Harishchandra was Satyarath's son and Rohit was his son. Famous kings like 
Raghu, Dilip Aja, Dirghabahu and Prajapati Dasharath were the descendants of 
Ikshvaku. 
Dasharath had four sons among whom Sri Rama was the eldest and who had 
killed the demon king Ravana. Rama had two sons--Lav and Kush. 
BASHKALI--THE DEMON KING  
Bhisma requested Sage Pulastya to reveal Why Lord Vishnu had to take 
incarnation as Vamana. 
Sage Pulastya replied---  
Once, during Satya Yuga, the demons had defeated the deities and driven 
them out from their abode--heaven. The mighty demon, Bashkali was their 
leader. He had become immortal an account of a boon received from Lord 
Brahma. Indra went to Lord Brahma and narrated the aweful tale of the 
deities. Lord Brahma assured him that Lord Vishnu would certainly help in this 
matter. Lord Brahma contemplated on Lord Vishnu who appeared in a very 
short time. 
When Lord Vishnu came to know about the deities's pitiable condition, he 
promised them that very soon Bashkali's wings would be clipped. 
Lord Vishnu said---"Very soon, I will take incarnation as Vamana. Indra will 
have to come along with me and demand a piece of land measured by my 
three steps. I shall then reveal my giant form and send him to the Patal loka 

70 
 



after making him bereft of his kingdom. In course of time Lord Vishnu 
manifested as Vamana from Aditi's womb. His manifestation was 
simultaneously marked by various auspicious signs--the air became full of 
fragrance, the deities started rejoicing, the trees started shedding flowers on 
their own and all the desires of living beings were fulfilled. 
Lord Vamana then went to Bashkali's palace accompanied by Indra. Both of 
them marvelled at the grandness of Bashkali's city, which was surrounded by a 
high boundary-wall.Bashkali was a very virtuous and benevolent king. He was 
truthful and well versed in all the scripture. His subject lived in prosperity and 
enjoyed a long life. When the demons saw Indra coming with a dwarf they 
informed Bashkali. Bashkali instructed the demons to bring both the guests 
with due respect. 
Bashkali treated his guests with all honor and asked Indra about the reason 
for his sudden arrival. 
Indra praised Bashkali's benevolence and said---"The short Brahmin 
accompanying me is desirous of a piece of land measured by his three steps." 
Bashkali was amused at this ridiculous demand and requested Vamana to ask 
for anything he wished. But, Vamana wanted nothing more than a small piece 
of land measured by his three steps. 
Shukracharya (Bashkali's guru) smelled something fishy and warned him, but 
he was not to listen. Bashkali then requested Vamana to go ahead and 
measure the land by his three steps.Suddenly, Lord Vamana transformed his 
physique into a giant size. His first step reached the Surya-loka and his second 
step touched the Dhruva-loka. He hit the top of the universe with his third 
step as a result of which water poured down. The water got collected and 
came to be known as Vaishnavi river. But, the land had still not been 
measured and hence Lord Vamana reminded Bashkali of his vow and 
ultimately the helpless Bashkali surrendered to the will of Lord Vamana and 
sought his refuge. Lord Vamana blessed him and sent him to Patalloka. 
SRI RAMA KILLS SHAMBUK  

71 
 



After killing the demons king Ravana, Sri Rama returned to Ayodhya. Many 
sages had arrived there to bless him on the occasion of his crowning 
ceremony. Sage Vashishtha was one of them.As Sri Rama was conversing with 
the sages a Brahmin arrived there with the corpse of his son and wailed---"O 
son! Your death is certainly due to some flaw of Sri Rama. Now, your mother 
and I have decided to give up our lives as there is no point in living." Sri Rama's 
heart was filled with grief and he asked Sage Vashishtha as to how the 
Brahmin could be helped. Sage Vashishtha revealed to Sri Rama that the 
Brahmin's son had died a premature death because of Shambuk. Vashishtha 
said--"Shambuk is a Shudra by birth, but he is doing an austere penance. 
Shudras are not entitled to do penance in all the three yugas, except the Kali 
Yuga. So, only his death can bring back the Brahmin's son alive." Sri Rama 
instructed both his younger brothers--Lakshman and Bharata, to look after the 
state's affairs in his absence and went in search of Shambuk boarded on his 
Pushpak Vimana. Sri Rama saw a man doing penance at the shore of a 
reservoir. He landed his Pushpak Vimana and went near that man. He 
introduced himself and enquired about the man's identity. Sri Rama asked-- 
Why are you doing such an austere penance. Who are you? Without moving 
the man replied that he was a shudra named Shambuk. He said--- I am 
desirous of attaining to devaloka and hence I am doing this penance. Sri Rama 
took out his sword and severed Shambuk's head. All the deities hailed Sri 
Rama and the Brahmin's child became alive once again. 
MANIFESTATION OF GANESH AND KARTIKEYA  
Once, before taking her bath, Goddess Parvati anointed unguent on her body 
and while removing it created a human form from the accumulated dross. The 
head of this human form resembled an elephant. Parvati then playfully 
immersed the human-form into river Ganga. But, to her sheer amazement the 
human form became alive and of enormous size. She accepted him as her son 
and he was none other than elephant-headed deity Ganesh. 

72 
 



Once, Lord Shiva became so deeply fascinated by her consort. Parvati hat he 
did not come out from his palace for 1000 years. The deities became worried 
and sent Agni to find out the reason. 
Agni disguised himself as a parrot and entered the palace where Shiva was 
enjoying privacy with Parvati. 
Meanwhile, Parvati went at the bank of a reservoir to quench her thirst. After 
reaching there she saw six divine women (matrikas) carrying water in the 
leaves of lotus flowers. As Parvati was thirsty, she requested them to give 
some water. The matrikas agreed on the condition that a son born to her 
(Parvati) should also have to be accepted as their son. Parvati gave her 
conscent. The matrikas gave Parvati water to drink. 
Hardly had Parvati finished drinking water than a divine child emerged out 
from her womb. The child possessed various weapons like, trident, Shakti and 
a noose in his hands. He was none other than Kartikeya.The deities appointed 
Kartikeya as the commander of their army. During that time, a mighty demon 
named Tarakasur used to torment the deities. Kartikeya killed that demon on 
the request of deities. 
AN IDEAL BRAHMIN AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF GAYATRI MANTRA  
Describing about the qualities of an ideal Brahmin, Sage Pulastya said---  
Once, Narada had asked Lord Brahma as to who was worthy of receiving 
Vishnu's blessings. Lord Brahma had told Narada that Lord Vishnu showered 
his blessings on those who engaged themselves in the service of Brahmins. A 
Brahmin should be virtuous and well versed in all the scriptures. A Brahmin 
who does not observe the rituals as mentioned in the Vedas, brings disgrace 
to his ancestors. An ideal Brahmin is respectful towards his parents, teachers 
and treats his guests with due honor. He never aspires for women other than 
his wife and chants the sacred Gayatri mantra everyday. 
Goddess Gayatri is said to have manifested in the lineage of Sankhyayan. She 
is of fair complexion and fire is the symbolical expression of her mouth. Lord 
Brahma dwells on her forehead, Lord Vishnu in her heart and Lord Rudra has 

73 
 



his abode in her braided hair. The Gayatri mantra consists of 24 letters and 
each of them is related with a specific deity. There is a mention of Gayatri 
mantra, which consists of 18 letters. It begins with the word 'agni' and ends 
with 'swaha'. The mantra is as follows--- OM AGNERVAKPUNSI YAJURDEDIN 
JUSHTA SOMAM PIBA SWAHA. 
A person, who chants the mantra for 100 times, becomes liberated from 
gravest of sin. The various deities related with the twenty-four letters of 
Gayatri Mantra are as follows-- 1st letter --- Agni 2nd letter --- Vayu 3rd letter 
--- Surya 4th letter --- Akash 5th letter --- Yamraj 6th letter --- Varuna 7th 
letter --- Brihaspati 8th letter --- Parjanya 9th letter --- Indra 10th letter --- 
Gandharva 11th letter --- Poosha 12th letter --- Mitra 13th letter --- Twashta 
14th letter --- Vasu 15th letter --- Marudganas 16th letter --- Soma 17th letter 
--Angira 18th letter --Vishwadeva 19th letter --Ashwins 20th letter --Prajapati 
21st letter ---All deities 22nd letter --- Rudra 23rd letter --- Brahma 24th letter 
--- Vishnu A devotee should then perform the ritual of 'nyas' by mentally 
establishing different words of the Gayatri mantra in the various parts of his 
body as given below -- OM BHUH ---in the heart, OM BHUVAH --- in the head, 
OM SWAH ---in the top-knot, OM TATSAVITURVARENYAM--in the whole body, 
OM BHARGODEVASYA DHIMAHI ---in both eyes, OM DHIYO YO NAH 
PRACHODAYAT ---in both hands. 
Regular chanting of Gayatri mantra bestowes similar virtues attained by the 
study of all the four vedas. A Brahmin who does not know Gayatri mantra is 
considered to be worse than a shudra. 
Anybody who chants Gayatri mantra attains salvation. 
BRAHMIN'S LIVELIHOOD 
 Describing how a Brahmin should earn his livelihood, Lord Brahma said to 
Narada--Alms, which a Brahmin gets without making any demand for it, is 
called Vritta. 'Unchhavritti' is even better than Vritti and it means collecting 
foodgrain which are scattered in places like fields, granary, market-place etc. 
A Brahmin should accept the Dakshaina that his host gives him after the 

74 
 



completion of yagya ceremony. He should engage himself in educational 
activities. He can also earn his livelihood by engaging himself in other 
auspicious activities. 
If the circumstances do not permit a Brahmin to earn his livelihood by any of 
the above mentioned means, then he may opt for the occupation of a 
kshatriya. In such a case, he should endeavor to have mastery both over the 
vedas as well as different weaponary. Battle should be his last option. When 
the very existence of religiousness is at stake, he should wage a war against 
irreligious people and to protect the religion. 
In an emergency situation, a Brahmin can also choose the occupation of a 
Vaishya and earn his livelihood by doing business or agriculture. But, while 
earning his livelihood by doing agriculture, he should in no circumstances 
abandon his own duties (duties of a Brahmin). He should be honest while 
doing business and never try to exploit the customers. 
NAROTTAM---THE BRAHMIN  
Describing about the importance of five virtuous deeds, Pulastya said to 
Bhisma---"The five supreme virtuous deeds are--obedience to parents, 
faithfulness towards husband, equanimity, not having enmity towards friends 
and devotion towards Lord Vishnu. By pleasing his father, one pleases all the 
deities. Mother is superior even to all the places of pilgrimage combined 
together. 
Pulastya then narrated the same tale to Bhisma, which Lord Brahma had once 
told some prominent sages ---  
Once, there lived a famous Brahmin called Narottam. He had acquired divine 
powers on account of his austere penance but unfortunately he never treated 
his parents with respect. After taking his daily bath, Narottam hanged his wet 
clothes in the open sky without any support and they used to dry without 
falling down on the earth. This special power had made him very arrogant.One 
day, a crane flying in the sky passed dung on his face, which made him very 
furious. Narottam cursed the crane as the result of which it was burnt to 

75 
 



death. His special power vanished due to the sin acquired by killing an 
innocent bird. Now, no longer his clothes remained in suspended position in 
the sky. 
Narottam became very sad. Suddenly he heard a heavenly voice instructing 
him to see a 'chandala' named Mook. "His discourses would be beneficial for 
you."- Said the heavenly voice. 
Narottam went in search of Mook--the chandal and found him in the servitude 
of his parents. 
Mook was a great devotee of his parents and his total devotion towards his 
parents had blessed him with an extraordinary power-his house used to hang 
in the air without any support. Narottam was deeply amazed at this wonderful 
sight. He wanted to know how Mook had acquired such divine powers. But, 
Mook requested him to wait, which made Narottam very angry. Mook then 
told Narottam---"I can talk to you only after attending to my parents. I am not 
that crane which was charred to death by your curse. If you don't have time 
then go and meet that 'faithful-wife. 
She will answer your questions." Narottam did not know where that faithful 
wife lived, so he stood there wondering what to do next. Suddenly Lord 
Vishnu emerged from Mook's house disguised as a Brahmin. He took 
Narottam to the 'faithful-wife's house. All along the way Lord Vishnu preached 
Narottam on the qualities of a chaste woman. As both of them were about to 
reach that chaste woman's house, Lord Vishnu disappeared, leaving Narottam 
all alone. 
Narottam requested the woman to enlighten him on the finer points of 
virtuosity. But, the woman was busy attending her husband and requested 
him to wait. Narottam threatened to curse her, to which the woman replied---
I am not that crane whom you had cursed. If you are in a hurry then you can 
go and meet 'Dharm--Tuladhar'. He is an honest businessman and is capable 
of answering your queries." Lord Vishnu once again appeared from that 
woman's house disguised as a Brahmin. Narottam asked him as to how were 

76 
 



both Mook and faithful wife aware of the incident in which the crane was 
charred to death. Lord Vishnu told him that both of them had acquired this 
special power by the virtue of their respective religiousness. 
Lord Vishnu and Narottam proceeded towards the place where 
Dharmtuladhar did his business transactions. As they were about to reach the 
place, Lord Vishnu disappeared once again, leaving Narottam all 
alone.Narottam saw Dharmtuladhar busy in his dealings with total honesty. 
He requested him to reveal as to what made the wet clothes to hang in the air 
without any support. 
Dharmtuladhar requested him to wait but Narottam was in a hurry to get 
answer to his questions. 
Dharmtuladhar told Narottam--Please wait for sometime, as I am busy doing 
my business transactions. If you don't have time then you can go and meet 
Adrohak, who is fully capable of giving answer to your questions. Lord Vishnu 
once again accompanied him disguised as a Brahmin. 
When both of them were about to reach the place where Adrohak used to 
live, Lord Vishnu disappeared and Narottam was left all by himself, once 
again. Narottam requested Adrohak to preach on the essence of religiousness. 
Adrohak was a man of impeccable conduct and had full control over the 
sensual urges. He advised Narottam to meet the supreme devotee of Lord 
Vishnu, who lived nearby. Adrohak said-- You would get answers to all your 
questions. He will reveal to you the reason that made wet clothes to hang in 
air without any support. Narottam then proceeded towards the place where 
the supreme devotee of Lord Vishnu lived. Lord Vishnu once again 
accompanied him in the guise of a Brahmin. After reaching there, Narottam 
expressed his desire of seeing Lord Vishnu. The supreme devotee took him to 
a temple situated inside the house-premise. 
Narottam was amazed to see the same Brahmin, who had been accompanying 
him all along the way, siting on a lotus flower. He realized that the Brahmin 
was Lord Vishnu himself. Lord Vishnu blessed him and said---Be respectful 

77 
 



towards your parents, if you want to attain to my abode. I dwell in the houses 
of people who are virtuous, truthful, possessed equanimity and who have full 
control over their passion. This is why you found me present at the homes of 
chandal, Tuladhar and Adrohak. Narottam realized his mistake and decided to 
be in the servitude of his parents for the rest of his life. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RUDRAKSHA, AMLA AND TULSI  
Once, while describing about the importance of Rudraksha to the sages, Vyasa 
said--- One who wears a Rudraksha rosary is supreme among all human 
beings. The mere sight of such a holy man absolves people of their sin. A 
Rudraksha bead bears features of a Linga and yoni on its surface. One should 
not wear a rudraksha on which above mentioned features are absent. 
Similarly two joint beads should never be worn. All the mantras become 
doubly powerful when chanted with the help of rudraksha-rosary.During Satya 
Yuga, there lived a mighty demon named Tripurasur. He had conquered the 
deities and was capable of moving in the space. The deities sought help of 
Lord Shiva, who killed Tripurasur by the sight of his third-eye. In the process, 
few drops of sweat, emanating from Shiva's body fell down on the earth. 
These sweat drops got transformed into a large Rudraksha-tree. 
Amla is a very nutritious fruit and great religious significance has been 
attached to it. Amla fruit is very dear to Lord Vishnu and its use on the 
auspicious day of Ekadashi brings unmatched virtue. A person who regularly 
eats amla enjoys a long life.The following tale adequately describes the 
religious importance of amla --  
Once upon a time, a chandala went into the forest for hunting. He hunted 
many deer and birds. 
Feeling hungry, he saw an amla tree and climbed up the tree. This way he 
satiated his hunger by eating sweet amla fruits. Unfortumately while he was 
climbing down the tree, he fell down and died.When the attendants of 
Yamaraj arrived to take back his soul, they could not do so even after 
repeated attempts. The attendants of Yamaraj became very surprised and 

78 
 



went to the sages for clarification. The sages revealed to the attendants that 
they could not go near the chandala's dead body, because he had eaten amla 
just before his death. Such is the glory of amla!  
Once Kartikeya asked Lord Shiva about the holiest tree, which was capable of 
giving salvation. 
Lord Shiva replied---The Tulsi plant is supreme among all the vegetations. She 
is very dear to Lord Vishnu and fulfills all the desires of a man. Lord Krishna 
dwells near the place where there is a Tulsi plant. Spirits and ghosts never 
dare to venture near the Tulsi plant. If a man attaches a Tulsi leaf to his Shikha 
at the time of his death, he is liberated from all his sins. One who worships 
Lord Vishnu by offering Tulsi-leaves attains salvation. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF SURYA'S WORSHIP  
Once, while describing about the importance of Surya's worship to 
Vaishampayan, Sage Vyasa narrated the following tale --- There lived a king 
named Bhadreshwar. He ruled over Madhyadesh.  
Once his left hand was infected with leprosy. Bhadreshwar, fearing the 
prospect of dreadful leprosy spreading to his whole body, decided to end his 
life. He expressed his desire to the head-priest. The head-priest cautioned 
Bhadreshwar that if he went ahead with his decision, then the whole kingdom 
would be destroyed. He said --- 'You will be cured of leprosy, if you worship 
Lord Surya.' The head-priest then told the king about the appropriate rituals of 
Surya--worship. King Bhadreshwar began his austerities and worshipped Lord 
Surya by chanting mantras and offering articles like Naivedya, fruits, Ardhya, 
Akshat etc to the deity. King Bhadreshwar was cured of his leprosy within a 
year by the virtue of his deep devotion towards Lord Surya. 
BHUMI KHAND –‘Earth section’ 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF SIN AND VIRTUE  
Once, Yayati requested Matali to describe the various sinful and virtuous 
deeds, which a man normally commits in his life. 

79 
 



Matali replied---'One who criticizes the vedas and follows the religion of 
other's after abandoning his own or torments virtuous people is a grave 
sinner. Similarly, not respecting one's parents, not giving 'Dakshaina' to a 
Brahmin after the completion of a shradha ceremony, studying the scriptures 
in an impure physical state are some other sinful deeds. 
'One who obstructs a hungry man from having his food or thirsty person from 
quenching his thirst commits a sin similar to that of killing a Brahmin. 
Matali described some other types of sins --- Back biting, seeing faults with 
others and demeaning their efforts, acquiring other's land by unfair means, 
killing innocent animals, having illicit relationship with women other than 
one's wife, telling lies, showing disrespect to the guests etc, are considered to 
be sinful deeds. 
Describing about the various types of virtuous deeds, Matali said ---Non-
violence, forgiveness, truthfulness, devotion towards God, benevolence, 
abstinence, oblation and meditation are some of the virtuous deeds. Donating 
food-grains, domesticated animals like horse, cow etc., giving water to a 
thirsty person are some other types of virtuous deeds. A person who donates 
wooden sandals a needy Brahmin attains to the heaven. Worshipping Lord 
Shiva or Lord Vishnu enables a man to attain to the Shivaloka or Vishnuloka 
respectively. 
KING YAYATI PROPAGATES VAISHNAVA--DHARMA  
King Yayati was the son of Nahush and a descendant of Soma--dynasty. He 
was a great devotee of Lord Vishnu and had contributed a lot in the 
propagation of Vaishnava--dharma. Yayati had sent many emissaries in all 
directions to propagate Vaishnava--dharma. During Yayati's reign his subject 
were prosperous and were free from any kind of sorrow. Peace prevailed 
everywhere and people did not experience any natural calamity like draught 
or famine. 
King Yayati enjoyed an unbelievably long life of one lakh years. He was blessed 
with eternal youth and his appearance was enough to give an inferiority 

80 
 



complex to a young man. All this, he had attained by the virtue of his supreme 
devotion towards Lord Vishnu. Indra was very scared of Yayati's increasing 
popularity and feared that if his virtuosity remained intact, he would very 
soon become the ruler of heaven. Indra instructed Kamadeva and Rati to find 
some means so that king Yayati could be enticed by human weaknesses like 
lust and infatuation. 
Kamadeva, accompanied by other Gandharvas went to Yayati's palace and 
sought his permission to stage a play. Yayati gave his permission and the play 
commenced. Rati appeared on the stage as a beautiful woman and was 
successful in corrupting the thoughts of Yayati. Yayati became so enchanted 
by Rati's beauty that he lost his senses and fell down unconscious. Finding the 
time opportune 'Vriddhavastha' (deity of old age) and 'Kamadeva' entered 
Yayati's body. This way the deities were successful in their designs and now 
the signs of old-age started to become evident in Yayati. 
YAYATI MARRIES ASHRUBINDUMATI  
Once, king Yayati went into a forest for hunting. He saw a stag, which had four 
horns and chased it. The deer led him deep into the forest and then 
disappeared. Yayati was tired and thirsty. He saw a lake and decided to 
quench his thirst. First of all he took his bath and then drank sweet water from 
the lake. As Yayati was relaxing at the bank of that lake, he heard a sweet 
voice singing a song. Yayati proceeded towards the direction from which the 
sound was coming. He saw a beautiful woman singing a song. Her companion 
accompanied the beautiful woman. 
Yayati became enchanted by the divine beauty of that woman and wanted to 
marry her. The beautiful woman's companion told Yayati that her friend could 
marry him only after he shed the signs of his old age. 
The beautiful woman was Ashrubindumati--the daughter of Rati. Vishala-her 
companion was the daughter of Varuna. Yayati returned to his palace and 
requested his two sons--Taru and Yadu to exchange their youth in lieu of his 
old age, but both of them refused to oblige him. Yayati cursed both of 

81 
 



them.Yayati had a son---Puru from his wife named Sharmishtha. When he 
made the same request to Puru, he agreed without any hesitation. Yayati 
became pleased with Puru and appointed him as his successor. 
Now, Yayati became young once again and went to meet Ashrubindumati. 
But, Ashrubindumati's friend Vishala was still not convinced and expressed 
apprehension that her friend would never play second fiddle to his two wives-
-Sharmishtha and Devayani.King Yayati, being blinded by his lust, assured 
Vishala that Ashrubindumati would enjoy the supreme authority and she had 
nothing to fear. He said--"I promise that you will be my only wife and I will 
have nothing to do with my wives." This way Yayati married Ashrubindumati 
and enjoyed a blissful married life for twenty-thousand years.  
Once, Ashrubindumati expressed her desire of visiting all the divine places--
Indraloka, Brahmaloka, Shivaloka and Vishnuloka. Yayati took back his old age 
from Puru and returned his youth. He appointed Puru as his successor and 
instructed his subject to live peacefully. But, the people wanted to be with 
Yayati, so all of them accompanied him to the heaven. Yayati visited all the 
divine places and ultimately attained to Vishnuloka. 
KUNJAL--THE ENLIGHTENED PARROT  
Once, while describing about the importance of a teacher, Lord Vishnu had 
narrated the following tale to king Vena--- Sage Chyavan came from the 
lineage of Bhargav.  
Once, he arrived at Omkareshwar with the objective of acquiring knowledge. 
Since he was tired, he decided to take rest under the shade of a Banyan tree. 
A parrot named Kunjal lived on that tree. 
The parrot had four young ones--Ujjawal, Samujjwal, Vijjwal and Kapinjal. 
Kunjal was a very learned parrot and had mastery over all the scriptures.  
Once, Ujjawal requested Kunjal to give discourse on various aspects of 
religiousness. Kunjal said---The whole world is full of sorrow. A man can be 
liberated from his sorrow by the means of salvation because salvation is free 
from sorrow. Salvation can be attained with the help of abstinence, self-

82 
 



control and having deep devotion in Lord Vishnu. The soul being enlightened 
is also called 'Paramatma'. But, covered by the darkness of ignorance it 
becomes difficult for the soul to attain salvation. A devotee can meditate on 
both the forms of Lord Vishnu--Sakar (with form) and Nirakar (formless). But, 
meditating on the Sakar form is easy for anybody. On the other hand only an 
enlightened soul can meditate on the 'nirakar' form of Lord Vishnu. There are 
various austerities related with Lord Vishnu and which if observed by a 
devotee, pleases him--Jaya, Vijaya, Jayanti, Vanjuli, Tilgandha, Trihsprisha, 
Akshanda and Manoraksha. All these austerities are similar to different types 
of Ekadashi or Dwadashi Vrata. Similarly, two other austerities namely 
Ashunyashayan and Janmashtami are capable of freeing a man from all his sin. 
A devotee who chants Shatnam stotra attains salvation. 
KUNJAL PREACHES VIJJWAL  
Describing the virtue of benevolence to Vijjwal. Kunjal--the learned parrot 
narrated the following tale --- 
Once, there lived a king named Subahu who ruled over chola desha. A learned 
Brahmin named Jaimini used to counsel him on religious and spiritual matters. 
One day, while Jaimini was giving a discourse on the virtue of benevolence, 
Subahu requested him to describe about those deeds that enables a man 
either to attain to the heaven or to hell. 
Jaimini replied--- One who earns his livelihood by improper means definitely 
goes to hell. 
Similarly, atheists, licentious people, proudy, backbiters and ungrateful people 
go to hell too. 
One who gobbles up other's wealth by illegal means or shows disrespect to his 
guest goes to hell. 
One who is a habitual liar or one who kills innocent animals or one who has 
abandoned the religious path is certain to go to hell.One who is truthful and 
engages himself in various virtuous deeds like penance, meditation, study of 
the scriptures, goes to the heaven. One who is respectful towards his elders 

83 
 



and leads a virtuous life goes to the heaven. In the same manner, he who is 
benevolent and free from vices like jealousy hatred etc. goes to the heaven. 
Similarly, one who leads his life as per the instructions given in the scriptures 
or has full control over his sensual desires goes to the heaven. 
King Subahu was so impressed by Jaimini's preaching that he decided to spend 
rest of his life in the service of Lord Madhusudan. He performed countless 
oblations as long as he was alive and attained to Vishnuloka after his death. 
KUNJAL NARRATES ABOUT HIS PREVIOUS BIRTH  
Sage Chyavan, who had been listening to the narration of Kunjal, was amazed 
by his profound knowledge. He asked Kunjal---O great soul! Who are you? 
From where did you acquire such divine knowledge.' Kunjal, who remembered 
everything about his previous birth said-- In my previous birth, I was the 
youngest son of a Brahmin named Vidyadhar. My name was Dharma Sharma. 
Seeing my dislike for study, my father became worried about my future. I used 
to waste my time loitering here and there. People used to make fun of my 
stupidity, which made me extremely sad. I decided to acquire knowledge but 
did not find anybody willing to teach me. 
In due course of time I became old but was still an idiot. One day, I was sitting 
in a temple cursing my fate. Suddenly, a sage arrived there and asked me as to 
what made me so sad. I narrated my woeful tale. The sage felt pity on my 
condition and blessed me with divine knowledge that made me capable of 
having advance knowledge of all the future incidents of the world. Sage 
Chyavan was curious to know about the reason that made Dharma Sharma to 
be born as a parrot. 
Kunjal replied--- O Brahmin! A man is influenced by the company he keeps. 
The reason why I took birth as a parrot is related with an incident, which 
occurred in my previous birth.  
Once, a wicked fowler sold a parrot to a Brahmin who in turn presented it to 
me. With the passage of time I became very attached with the parrot and 
gradually Deviated from my virtuous path. As a result all my divine knowledge 

84 
 



vanished and I became an idiot once again.One day, a cat arrived and killed 
that parrot in my absence. I became very sad and used to spend my time 
crying over the dead parrot. Ultimately I died but even at the time of death, 
my mind was preoccupied with the thoughts of my beloved parrot. As a result, 
I was born as a parrot but fortunately I remembered my previous birth even 
while I was still in my mother's womb. I was full of remorse and used to curse 
myself for having wasted my life. Sage Chyavan was amazed by the narration 
of Kunjal--the learned parrot. 
SWARGA--KHANDA SOME PROMINENT HOLY PLACES OF BHARATAVARSHA  
Once, sages requested Suta to describe about the most prominent places of 
pilgrimage situated in Bharatavarsha. Suta commenced his narration by 
describing the origin of creation and then switched over to the geographical 
characteristics of Bharatavarsha. Suta said---'There are seven prominent 
mountain ranges in Bharatavarsha--Mahendra, Malay, Sahya, Shaktiman, 
Rikshavan, Vindhya and Pariyatra. Some prominent rivers supplying potable 
water to the inhabitants of Bharatavarsha are---Ganga, Sindhu, Saraswati, 
Godwari, Narmada, Shatadru, Yamuna, Vipasha, Mahanadi, Vidisham, Varuna 
etc. The names of the main Janapadas situated in the northern part of 
Bharatavarsha are Kuru, Panchal, Shalva, Matreya, Jangal, Shoorsen, Pulind, 
Baudh, Chedi, Matsya, Bhoj, Sindhu, Utkal, Koshal, Madra, Kalinga, Kashi, 
Malav, Magadh, Videh, Anga, Banga, Surashtra, Kekay, Kashmir and Gandhar. 
Similarly, Janpadas like Dravid, Keral. Prachya, Karnatak, Kuntal, Chol, Sauhrid, 
Kona, Korak, Kalad, Mushal and Sutap are situated in the southern part of 
Bharatavarsha. 
Suta then described about the greatness of Pushkar tirth by recounting an 
incident related with the Pandavas--- "One day, Sage Narada visited the 
Pandavas who were living in exile. The Pandavas had visited many places 
during the course of their exile period and wanted to know about the fruits 
they had acquired due to their pilgrimage. 
"Sage Narada then recounted an incident when king Dilip had once posed the 
same question to Sage Vashishtha. Sage Vashishtha while describing about the 

85 
 



greatness of Pushkar said--- Pushkar tirth is the holiest place where Lord 
Brahma has his abode. Deities consider themselves fortunate to be at 
Pushkar. A person who takes a holy dip at Pushkar and worships Lord Brahma 
acquires virtues equivalent to the accomplishment of the Ashwamedha 
Yagya." Sage Vashishtha continued with the description of some other 
prominent places of pilgrimage like Jambumarg, Narmada Amarkantak etc. 
JAMBUMARG, RIVER NARMADA AMARKANTAK  
Continuing with his narration, Sage Vashishtha said--- A man desirous of going 
on a pilgrimage should first of all visit Jambumarg, because it is revered even 
by the deities and the sages. By visiting this holy place a man acquires virtue 
equivalent to the accomplishment of an Ashwamedha Yagya and attains to 
Vishnuloka. A man should then visit Tundulik Ashrama, Agastya Ashrama and 
Kanya Ashrama, which are situated near Jambumarg. Taking a dip in the holy 
water of Kotitirth, situated near Mahakal temple is believed to bestow 
undiminished virtue. Bhadravat is a famous place of pilgrimage related with 
Lord Shiva and paying a visit here gives virtue equivalent to donation of 1000 
cows. 
A man who takes holy dip in river Narmada and performs 'tarpan' in the name 
of manes acquires fruits similar to the accomplishment of Agnishtom yagya. 
Narmada is the holiest of all the rivers. 
A man becomes liberated from his sins by taking bath for three weeks in river 
Saraswati. 
Similarly it takes one week of regular bath in river yamuna for a man to 
become absolved of all his sins. The mere touch of Ganga water liberates a 
man from all his sins, but mere sight of river Narmada is enough to liberate a 
man from all his sins. 
Kotirudras are believed to dwell in the vicinity of Amarkantak mountain. All 
together sixty crores and sixty thousand places of pilgrimage are situated all 
around this holy mountain. 

86 
 



Anybody present in the vicinity of this mountain must refrain from any kind of 
sinful deeds. 
Visiting Amarkantak mountain during solar and lunar eclipses is considered to 
be extremely auspicious. Similarly the confluence site of Narmada and Kaveri 
is considered to be sacrosanct. 
Anybody who takes a holy dip in the confluence of Narmada and Kaveri 
becomes liberated from his sins. 
'DHARMA TIRTH' AND YAMUNA-SNAN  
Sage Narada continued with the description of various holy places and said--- 
"A pilgrim must visit Dharma Tirth, which is named after the Lord of death--
Dharma.  
Once upon a time Dharmaraj had performed an austere penance at that place 
this is the reason why it became famous as Dharma Tirth. By visiting Dharma 
Tirth, a man liberated all his ancestors up to seventh generation. After that a 
pilgrim should go to Kalap-forest, Saugandhik-forest, SuvarnaDhumavanti 
respectively. All the above mentioned holy places are capable of giving 
salvation." Describing about the virtues of taking a holy dip in river Kalini 
(Yamuna) sage Narada said -- A person who takes a holy dip in Yamuna 
becomes liberated from all his sorrows. The virtue acquired by taking a bath in 
Yamuna is greater than paying visits to various holy places like Pushkar, 
Kurukshetra, Brahmavarta and Kashi.Taking a dip in Yamuna also helps in the 
fulfillment of all the desires of a man. Although, different rituals have been 
attributed to various yugas like Satya Yuga--penance, Treta Yuga--knowledge, 
Dwapar Yuga--yagya and Kali Yuga-- donation, yet virtue of taking a holy dip in 
Yamuna transcends even time.”  
“Although the whole stretch of river Yamuna is believed to be holy, yet 
Yamuna flowing near Mathura holds special importance because of her deep 
association with Lord Krishna."Narada narrated a tale to prove the significance 
of taking a bath in Yamuna. 

87 
 



"During Satya Yuga there lived a Vaishya named Hemakundal. He had earned 
lot of wealth by dint of hard work. Although he was very rich yet happiness 
deluded him, as he had no progeny. 
He was worried as to who would inherit his property after his death."In course 
of time, Hemakundal attained old age and after realizing about the 
impermanence of the world indulged himself in virtuous deeds. He was 
blessed with two sons--Srikundal and Vikundal. When both his sons grew up, 
Hemakundal went into the forest to do penance.”  
“Sri Kundal and Hemakundal squandered the whole wealth which their father 
had earned so painstakingly. Both of them were of loose moral character and 
had illicit relationship with many prostitutes. In a very short time they became 
poor and both of them starved to death. When the yamdoots reached 
yamloka after taking their souls, Yamraj ordered--'Put Sri Kundal in Raurav hell 
but send Vikundal to the heaven.' While Vikundal was being taken to the 
heaven he asked one of the yamdoots--'The sins committed by my brother 
and me were almost identitical then why is my brother being sent to hell while 
I am being sent to heaven.' The yamdoot replied-You are being metted out 
this special treatment on account of your virtues acquired by bathing twice in 
river Yamuna.There was a Brahmin friend of your's named Swamitra.You had 
accompanied him to Mathura and twice taken bath in the holy Yamuna. By 
the virtue of the first bath you became liberated from all your sins, while the 
second bath helped you in attaining to the heaven. Vikundal requested the 
yamdoot to allow his brother to accompany him to heaven. Yamdoot replied 
that his brother could accompany him to the heaven provided he donated all 
his virtues to him. 
Vikundal agreed to donate his virtues to his elder brother for the sake of his 
liberation. This way, both Srikundal and Vikundal attained to the heaven. 
KASHIPURI, KAPARDISHWAR AND GAYA  
On being asked by Yudhisthira about the grandeur of holy places like 
Kashipuri, Kapardishwar and Gaya. Narada said --- Just as Lord Mahadeva is 

88 
 



supreme among all the deities, in the same manner Kashipuri holds a 
significant status among all the places of pilgrimage. Hence an individual 
should make it a point to visit Kashi once in his life time. The famous 
Shivalinga Kopardishwar is installed at Kashi and is said to fulfill all the desires 
of a man. Performance of various rituals at Kashi liberates a man from all his 
sins-all his flaws are eliminated automatically just by residing in Kashi. 
A devotee who regularly practices meditation in the temple of Lord 
Kapordishwar attains Yogasiddhi within six months. Worshipping Lord 
Kapardishwar after taking a holy dip in Pishach-mochan kunda liberates a man 
from gravest of sin like Brahmahatya, etc. Gaya is considered to be a 
sacrosanct place of pilgrimage and various rituals for the pacification of the 
souls of dead ancestors are performed here. Anybody who offers Pindadan 
and tarpan at Gaya not only liberates his ancestors but also himself. There is a 
very famous Banyan tree named Akshayvat at Gaya. Gaya is situated at the 
bank of river Falgu. 
PURANAS--THE EMBODIMENT OF SRI HARI 
According to Suta, all the Puranas are nothing but the mediums through which 
Sri Hari manifests himself---Brahma Purana is said to be the forhead of Sri 
Hari, Padma Purana is said to be the 'heart' of Sri Hari, Vishnu Purana is said to 
be the 'right arm' of Sri Hari. Shiva Purana is said to be the 'left arm' of Sri 
Hari. Srimad Bhagawat is said to be his 'thigh', Narada Purana is said to be his 
'navel', Markendeya Purana is said to be his 'right-foot'. Agni Purana is said to 
be his 'left foot', Bhavish Purana is said to be his 'right-knee', Brahma Vaivrata 
Purana is said to be his 'leftknee'. 
Linga Purana is said to be his 'right ankle', Varaha Purana is said to be his 'left 
ankle', Skanda Purana is said to be the hair on the body of 'Sri Hari. Vamana 
Purana is said to be his skin. Kurma Purana is said to be his back. Matsya 
Purana is said to be his stomach. Garuda Purana is said to be his bone-
marrow. Brahmanda Purana is said to be his bone. 

89 
 



So, all the Puranas being manifestation of different parts of Sri Hari's body are 
very sacred and capable of bestowing salvation. 
 
PATAL-KHAND  -‘Hell section’ 
SHESHNAG NARRATES TALES OF SRI RAMA'S RETURN FROM LANKA  
Once, Sages requested Suta to describe about Sri Rama's return from Lanka. 
Suta narrated the same tale, which Sheshnag had once told Vatsyayan. 
Sheshnag said--After the killing of demon king Ravana, Sri Rama appointed 
Vibhishan as the king of Lanka. He then decided to return to Ayodhya on 
Pushpak-Vimana, which Vibhishan had presented to him. He along with Sita, 
Lakshman, Sugreev and Hanuman boarded the aircraft and flew towards 
Ayodhya.The earth looked beautiful from such a high altitude and Sri Rama 
was continuously describing about the importance of various places over 
which the aircraft flew. As the aircraft was about to enter the airspace of 
Ayodhya, Sri Rama recognized Bharata, who was living at Nandigram at that 
time. 
Bharata had vowed not to enter Ayodhya till the return of Sri Rama, hence he 
stayed at Nandigram situated at the outskirts of Ayodhya awaiting Sri Rama's 
return. He led an austere life as the result of which he had become weak and 
feeble. 
On seeing Bharata, Sri Rama instructed Hanuman to inform him about his 
(Rama's) arrival. 
Hanuman went to the hermitage of Bharata and informed him about Sri 
Rama's arrival. Bharata's joy knew no bound and he expressed his desire to 
reward Hanuman for bringing such auspicious news. Bharata then 
accompanied Hanuman and went to meet Sri Rama. Sri Rama's heart was 
filled with grief when he saw Bharata, who looked like a hermit in his 'Valkal' 
and 'Kaupin'. On the other hand Bharata cursed himself for being the cause of 
Sri Rama's miseries. Bharata asked for Sri Rama's forgiveness and said---'O 
Lord! You had to go into exile only because of me. I can never be absolved of 

90 
 



my sin.' Sri Rama consoled him and after taking Bharata into his embrace 
enquired about his welfare. He told Bharata that he had to undergo the 
sufferings of exile because of his own destiny. 'You are not at fault. Don't 
curse yourself for my misery.' said Sri Rama. At last all of them including 
Bharata boarded Pushpak Vimana and the aircraft took- off for 
Ayodhya.Continuing with Sri Rama's tale, Sheshnag said--When Sumanth 
brought the news of Sri Rama's arrival at Ayodhya, people danced in joy, 
Preparations started being made for Sri Rama's grand reception. The whole 
city of Ayodhya was decorated with rows of lighted lamps.Sri Rama and Sita 
alighted from the Pushpak Vimana and both of them were carried in a 
palanquin to the palace. People stood in queues on both sides of the road 
with folded hands. Sri Rama blessed them by raising his hand. First of all Rama 
went to meet Kaikayi who was full of remorse and guilt. Sri Rama consoled her 
and then went to meet Sumitra to pay his obeisance to her. At last, he went to 
meet his own mother--Kaushalya, who was dying to see him. Kaushalya 
blessed Sri Rama, Sita and Lakshman. Bharata then instructed the royal 
astrologers to decide upon an auspicious moment for Sri Rama's coronation. 
Thus Sri Rama became the king of Ayodhya. During his reign peace and 
prosperity prevailed everywhere. People were virtuous and there was no sign 
of sin. 
RAVANA-- THE MIGHTY DEMON  
People of Ayodhya lived peacefully during Sri Rama's reign until one fateful 
day when they were struck by a bad news--Sri Rama had abandoned Sita after 
a Washerman leveled an unfair charge against her character. Such was the 
greatness of Sri Rama that opinion of each and every individual was given due 
respect irrespective of his position and status. One day, Sage Agastya arrived 
in the royal court of Sri Rama. After the formal Salutations were over. Sage 
Agastya complimented Sri Rama for killing Ravana. 
Sri Rama asked Agastya--'Who was Ravana-- the tormentor of deities? I am 
anxious to know about the origin of his whole clan." Sage Agastya replied--
Vishrava was the grandson of Lord Brahma. His father was sage Pulastya. 

91 
 



Vishrava had two wives--Mandakini and Kaikasi. Mandakani's son was Kubera 
while Kaikasi was the mother of Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan. Kubera 
ruled over Lanka. One day, Kubera, came to see his parents boarded on his 
aircraft--Pushpak Vimana. After he returned to Lanka, Ravana, who was very 
much impressed by Kubera's royal appearances asked Kaikasi-- "Who was this 
fellow? From where did he acquire such an amazing aircraft." Kaikasi revealed 
to Ravana that the guest was none other than his step-brother Kubera. She 
said- -"Kubera is the son of your step mother--Mandakini. He has made his 
mother proud by his conduct but I am ashamed of you, because of your 
inconsequential existence. You are no better than a worm." Ravana decided to 
prove his mother wrong by acquiring insurmountable power and authority. 
Ravana went to the forest and performed an austere penance for ten 
thousand years by standing on one foot. He fixed his gaze at the sun and 
never for a moment did he remove his gaze from it. 
Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan also engaged themselves in austere penance. At 
last, Lord Brahma became pleased and blessed Ravana with a vast kingdom. 
Ravana then started tormenting his step-brother Kumbhakarna. He snatched 
Kubera's Pushpak Vimana and drove him out of Lanka. 
Ravana then turned his attention towards the deities and drove them out of 
heaven. The deities went to seek the help of Lord Brahma who in turn took 
them to Lord Shiva. Even Lord Shiva was clueless about the means by which 
the indomitable Ravana could be subdued. Ultimately all of them including 
Lord Shiva went to Lord Vishnu and sought his help. 
Lord Vishnu assured them by saying ---"I shall take incarnation as Rama at a 
place called Ayodhya. Presently, Ayodhya is being ruled by Dashrath, who 
inspite of having three queens, does not have any son. I shall manifest myself 
as Rama. Don't worry! I shall eliminate the menace called Ravana." Sage 
Agastya also told Sri Rama that Ravana belonged to the caste called 
'Brahmrakshas'. This way, Sage Agastya after having finished his narration 
looked at Sri Rama anticipating further queries. 

92 
 



AGASTYA ADVISES SRI RAMA TO PERFORM ASHWAMEDHA YAGYA  
Sri Rama requested sage Agastya to tell about the means by which he could 
become liberated from the sins of killing Brahmins. Sage Agastya advised him 
to perform Ashwamedha Yagya. He also described the rituals of performing 
Ashwamedha Yagya--- "Get a horse of white colour and after worshipping it 
on Vaishakh Purnima leave it to wander freely. Tie a piece of paper on its 
forehead on which your name and other details are mentioned. Soldiers 
should follow that horse wherever it goes. You should fight a battle against 
any king who dares to stop the horse. You should lead a celibate life till the 
horse returns back to the same place from where it had been let loose. It is 
customary for the performer of Ashwamedha Yagya to indulge himself in 
benevolent deeds till the completion of Ashwamedha Yagya." Sri Rama agreed 
to perform Ashwamedha Yagya. He went to the seashore accompanied by 
numerous sages. He then cultivated a vast expanse of land with the help of a 
golden plough. A large oblation site was constructed and thus began 
Ashwamedha Yagya under the supervision of Vashishtha. 
THE HORSE IS LET LOOSE  
As per the advice of Sage Vashishtha, Sri Rama instructed his soldiers to bring 
a white-horse. A white parasol was fixed on its back and the horse was 
decorated with colourful clothes. The horse was then let loose and the faithful 
soldiers of Sri Rama followed it wherever the horse went.A gold-sheet was 
hanged in the horse's neck and upon which was inscribed--This horse belongs 
to Sri Rama, the son of Dasharath. Anybody who dares to stop this horse will 
meet ruthless punishment. 
Shatrughan followed the horse as per the instruction of his elder brother, Sri 
Rama. Bharata and Pushkal also accompanied him. A huge army led by 
Kalnemi was marching behind the horse. 
LAV FASTENS THE HORSE  
Some of the kings tried to stop the horse, but were defeated by Shatrughan. 
This way the horse continued to move ahead without any problem till it 

93 
 



reached the bank of river Ganga. It was early morning and Lav after noticing 
the presence of horse become curious. He went near the horse and tried to 
read the inscription hanging down its neck. He made fun of the might of Sri 
Rama and fastened the horse. The soldiers tried to release the horse but Lav 
severed their arms. 
They returned to Shatrughan and narrated the whole incident to him. 
LAV VANQUISHES THE WHOLE ARMY 
Shatrughan became extremely furious after seeing the condition of his injured 
soldiers. He instructed Kalnemi to teach Lav a lesson. Kalnemi confronted Lav 
with a huge army and a ferocious battle took place. Lav managed to kill 
Kalnemi, which created havoc in the rival's army. The surviving soldiers tried 
to hold their ground but were forced to flee on account of a fierce assault 
from Lav. 
Shatrughan then ordered Pushkal to fight Lav but he became unconscious 
after being hit by Lav's arrow. Now, Shatrughan's anger crossed all limits and 
he ordered Hanuman to kill Lav. 
Hanuman uprooted a large tree and tried to hit Lav, but Lav cut that tree into 
hundred pieces with a volley of arrows. Lav then released many arrows in the 
direction of Hanuman. Hanuman fought valiantly but ultimately he fell down 
unconscious. 
LAV BECOMES UNCONSCIOUS  
When Shatrughan learnt about Hanuman's fate he was infuriated and went to 
fight Lav. But when he saw a tender looking child in front of him he was 
surprised. Shatrughan asked -- 'O brave child! Who are you! Who is your 
father?' But Lav was not interested in his irrelevant queries and challenged 
him for a duel. Shatrughan was left with no other option but to fight. A 
tremendous battle was fought between them. 
Shatrughan released volleys of arrow towards Lav but all of them were 
neutralized by him. For a brief time Shatrughan lost his consciousness. After 
regaining his consciousness, he aimed his most lethal weapon towards Lav. 

94 
 



The arrow hit Lav and he fell down unconscious. Lav's companions went and 
informed Sita about the whole incident. Kush came forward to fight against Sri 
Rama's army. When he reached the battlefield he saw Lav who was held 
captive by the enemy's army's. By that time, Lav had regained his 
consciousness and after seeing Kush he somehow managed to free himself 
from the clutches of his captors. 
Now, both the brothers launched a fierce attack on the enemy. The whole 
army of Sri Rama started running helter and shelter. It did not take much time 
for Lav and Kush to vanquish the whole army. All the great warriors like 
Hanuman, Sugriva, Pushkal, Angad Veermani and even Shatrughan were 
either held captive or injured in the battle. Both the brothers fastened 
Hanuman and Sugriva with ropes and took them to Sita. Sita immediately 
recognized Hanuman and Sugriva. She instructed both her sons to set them 
free as well as the horse. Lav and Kush followed the instruction of Sita and 
released everybody from their captivity. Sita then whispered- --'May all the 
dead soldiers become alive.' Her words came true and all the dead soldiers 
became alive once again. Shatrughan regained his consciousness too. 
THE ARMY RETURNS TO AYODHYA  
Shatrughan decided to return to Ayodhya. He instructed Sumati to make all 
the necessary arrangements for the safe return of the caravan, which 
comprised not only of Sri Rama's army but also of all the defeated kings and 
their vanquished armies. When Sri Rama came to know about their arrival, he 
sent Lakshman to receive them. Lakshman received the victorious army with 
all the honor and the all of them came to the palace. Sri Rama curiously asked 
Sumati about everything that had happened. 
Sumati paraded all the vanquished kings who had made the mistake of 
stopping the horse-- Sumad, Sabahu, Daman, Satyavan, Surath, etc. He then 
narrated the brave deed of Lav and Kush.He also revealed how mighty 
warriors like Hanuman, Sugriva, Shatrughan etc. had been defeated by both of 
them. 

95 
 



SRI RAMA SENDS LAKSHMAN TO BRING SITA  
Sage Valmiki was present in Ayodhya to attend the Ashwamedha Yagya. Sri 
Rama asked him about the identity of the two children--Lav and Kush. Valmiki 
said --- Sita was pregnant at the time you had abandoned her. I gave her 
refuge in my hermitage where she gave birth to twins-- Lav and Kush. Both the 
children were brought up in my hermitage with love and care. I taught them 
all the sacred texts and scriptures and made them masters of various 
weaponries. So, Lav and Kush are your sons. You must bring Sita back to 
Ayodhya with due honor, because she is pure and chaste. Moreover your 
whole army owe its life to her." Sri Rama's heart was filled with grief. He 
instructed Lakshman to bring Sita along with Lav and Kush. Lakshman went to 
Valmiki's hermitage and requested Sita to return to Ayodhya. Sita refused to 
return but sent Lav and Kush along with Lakshman. When Sri Rama found that 
only Lav and Kush had come, he once again sent Lakshman to bring Sita. 
Lakshman followed his instruction and went to Valmiki's hermitage for the 
second time. Meanwhile, Valmiki instructed Lav and Kush to sing the praise of 
Sri Rama in their melodious voice. Everybody was moved by their soulful 
rendition. Sri Rama took Lav and Kush in his embrace. 
SITA RETURNS TO AYODHYA  
Sri Rama eulogised all the revered sages who had arrived to attend the 
Ashwamedha Yagya. The holy water of Saryu was brought and sprinkled in the 
yagya kund where Ashwamedha Yagya was being performed, amidst the 
chanting of vedic mantras. Hardly had Sri Rama touched the horse with his 
hands then it transformed into a human being. Everybody was amazed by this 
incident. Sri Rama asked that man as to how he had attained the form of a 
horse. The man revealed to the assembled people that he had become a horse 
due to Durvasa's curse. 'Later on Sage Durvasa had mercy on me and assured 
that I would regain my human form by the divine touch of Sri Rama.' Having 
said this the man attained to the heaven. In course of time Sri Rama organised 
two more Ashwamedha Yagyas and his glory reverberated through all the 
three worlds. 

96 
 



UTTAR - KHAND –‘Last section’ 
BADRIKASHRAMA  
Once, on being asked by the sages about the greatness of Badrikasharama, 
Suta narrated the same tale, which Lord Shiva had once told sage Narada ---
Lord Mahadeva had told Narada that altogether there were one lakh and 
twenty-five thousand mountains and Badrikashrama was supreme among 
them. Lord Mahadeva said--- Badrikasharama is the abode of Lord Nara-
Narayan. Narayan--the origin of all creations has four arms and his complexion 
is dark. Narayan manifests himself in both forms--Sakar as well as Nirakar. He 
is the eternal Purusha and is worshipped by people during the full period of 
Uttarayan. Since Badrikashrama is covered with snow during the period of 
Dakshainayan, Narayan is not worshipper during these six months. All the 
deities dwell at Badrikasharama. The sages live in their hermitages at 
Badrikasharama. River Alaknanda flows at Badrikasharama. 
Anybody taking a dip in the holy water of Alaknanda becomes liberated from 
his sins. 
THE DESCENT OF RIVER GANGA  
Describing about the reason why river Ganga was brought down on the earth, 
Lord Mahadeva told Narada--- King Bhagirath was the architect of Ganga's 
arrival on the earth. He wanted to liberate his dead ancestorss from the curse 
of Sage Kapila. King Sagar came from the lineage of the famous king--
Harishchandra. Sagar had two queens. The elder queen had sixty thousand 
sons while the younger queen had just one--Panchajan. Panchajan's son was 
Anshuman, who himself was the father of Dilip. Dilip was the father of 
Bhagirath. 
Bhagirath did an austere penance on the Himalayas for ten thousand years. As 
a result, river Ganga descended on the earth. I (Shiva) held her in the locks of 
my hair and she remained there for ten thousand more years. Bhagirath 
requested me to release Ganga so that his ancestors could be liberated. I 
agreed to release Ganga and Bhagirath took her to the Patalloka where his 

97 
 



ancestor's had been charred to death due to Kapila's curse. Bhagirath 
sprinkled the water of Ganga on the ashes of his ancestors and each of them 
attained salvation as a result. Eventually, Ganga resurfaced at Haridwar--the 
most sacred place of pilgrimage. 
DASHARATH PACIFIES SHANI  
Sage Narada curiously asked Lord Mahadeva as to what made Shani such a 
volatile planet.Lord Mahadeva replied--- Shani is extremely violent by nature 
and everybody is scarred of this planet. 
Once, the royal astrologer of Dasharath was petrified at the prospect of Shani 
entering the constellation of Rohini and warned him of its dire consequences. 
'If the Shani is not prevented from entering Rohini, then famine would occur 
lasting for more than twelve years.' said the royal astrologers. 
Dasharath went above the sky to subdue the might of Shani well armed with 
divine weapons. 
Shani became terrified on seeing Dasharath in such a menacing mood and 
expressed his willingness to fulfill his desires. 
QUALITIES OF A VAISHNAV  
Giving a detailed description of the qualities of a Vaishnava, Lord Shiva told 
Narada ---A person who has total devotion in Lord Vishnu is called a 
Vaishnava. He is truthful, kind and forgiving by nature. He engages himself in 
austere penance and refrains from any kind of violence. He wears a Tulsi bead 
in his neck and puts on tilak. He is well versed in sacred text like the Vedas, 
Puranas etc. The mere sight of a Vaishnava is enough to liberate a sinner from 
all his sins. Feeding a Vaishnava bestowes virtue equivalent to feeding 
thousand of ordinary Brahmins. 
INDRAPRASTHA  
The sages enquired from Suta about the holiest city situated on the banks of 
river Yamuna. 
Suta narrated the tale which Sage Saubhari had once told Yudhisthira--- 

98 
 



Once, Narada and Parvat were travelling through an aerial route, while they 
were flying over Khandav forest, they were lured by the beautiful sight of river 
Yamuna. They decided to take rest for a while. Both of them descended down 
and entered river Yamuna to take their bath. Meanwhile, King Shibi who ruled 
over Ushinar saw them. He eagerly waited at the bank of Yamuna. When 
Narada and Parvat emerged out of the Yamuna, they found king Shibi eagerly 
waiting for them. Meanwhile king Shibi had noticed the remains of numerous 
'havan-kundas' (oblation-altars) spread in a large area. 
After the formal exchanges of pleasantaries were over, King Shibi asked 
Narada about those havan- kundas. 
Narada replied--During ancient times Indra had performed numerous Yagyas 
at this place to express his gratitude to Lord Vishnu, with whose blessings he 
had regained the heaven from the clutches of Hiranyakashipu. In course of 
time, this place became famous as Indraprastha. This sacrosanct place is holier 
than all the holy places combined together. Indraprastha is spread in the area 
of one yojan from east to west and four yojans from north to south. 
VAIKUNTH--THE ABODE OF LORD VISHNU  
Describing about the grandeur of Vaikunth, Lord Shiva told Parvati--A person 
who has total devotion in Vishnu attains to Vaikunth after his death. 
Vaikuntha is the abode of Vishnu and constitutes of numerous Janapadas. The 
magnificence of Vaikunth is beyond description and it houses many grand 
palaces fully decorated with jewels and diamonds. The central part of 
Vaikuntha is called Ayodhya and is well protected by dwarpals named Chanda, 
Prachanda, Bhadra, Subhadra, Jaya, Vijay, Dhata and Vidhata.Vaikunth is 
inhabited by countless divine people who live in well illuminated houses. 
In the central part of Ayodhya is situated the 'antahpuri' of Lord Vishnu. It is 
inhabited by celestial beauties--apsaras. There is a divine canopy situated just 
at the center of antahpuri, where Lord Vishnu has his divine throne. The divine 
throne is surrounded by deities as well as by the embodiments of all the four 
Vedas--- Rigveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda. The deities---Agni, 

99 
 



Surya and Chandrama have their dwellings at the center of Vishnu's 
throne.There is a grand pedestal called yogapeeth established on the throne. 
A beautiful lotus flower is established on the yogapeeth on which is seated 
Lord Vishnu along with his consort Lakshmi. Lord Vishnu appears divine in his 
complexion of a blue lotus, whose radiance is enough to subdue crores of sun. 
He has radiant ear-rings hangings down his earlobes. His forehead is covered 
with curly hair. He has the famous 'Kaustubh mani' in his neck. He holds a 
conch and a chakra in each of his two hands and the remaining two hands are 
in the posture of giving blessings. 
THE INCARNATIONS OF MATSYA AND KURMA  
Once, Goddess Parvati expressed her desire to know about all the incarnations 
of Lord Vishnu. 
Lord Mahadeva replied-- Lord Brahma had created numerous Prajapatis like 
Bhrigu, Marichi, Atri, Daksha, Kardam, Pulastya, Pulaha, Angira and Kratu. 
Marichi was the father of Kashyapa. 
Sage Kashyapa had four wives--Aditi, Diti, Kadru and Vinta.Aditi was the 
mother of Deities while Diti gave birth to demons like--Makar, Hayagreeva, 
Mahabali, Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakashipu Jambha, Maya etc. Makar was a 
mighty demon, who after deceitfully acquiring the Vedas from Lord Brahma 
had hidden himself inside an ocean. Lord Brahma requested Vishnu to liberate 
the sacred Vedas from the possession of Makar. 
Lord Vishnu then took the incarnation of Matsya and after killing Makar gave 
back the vedas to Lord Brahma. Durvasa was the son of Sage Atri.  
Once, he went to Indraloka to see Indra. At that time, Indra was planning to go 
out somewhere. Durvasa presented a garland of Parijat flowers to Indra. 
Indra, after receiving the garland from Durvasa kept it carelessly on the 
forehead of his elephant-Airavat. This garland was trampled under its feet by 
the elephant, which infuriated Durvasa. He cursed Indra by saying---Immense 
prosperity has made you arrogant. But you will become a pauper within a very 
short time. 

100 
 



Durvasa's words came to be true and Indra found that not only the heaven 
but all the three worlds had become bereft of Goddess Lakshmi. Prosperity 
vanished and poverty prevailed everywhere. 
The deities became worried and went to take the help of Brahma. Brahma 
took the deities to Lord Vishnu. Vishnu became pleased with their eulogy and 
said -- I will take incarnation as Kurma. If the ocean were churned with the 
help of Mandarachal mountain and Vasuki, then Goddess Lakshmi would 
manifest herself. I shall hold the Mandarachal mountain on my back. This way 
the churning of ocean commenced. The Mandarachal mountain was uprooted 
and placed inside the 'Ksheer-Sagar' and which rested on the back of Lord 
Kurma. The serpent--Vasuki, was held by deities and demons on both the 
ends. 
First of all the most venomous poison--Kalkut emerged from the ocean. Seeing 
both the deities and demons unwilling to accept it. (Lord Shiva) drank it. 
After the emergence of Kalkut, Goddess Daridra and Varunai manifested 
themselves. Similarly, Airavat- elephant, Uchchaishrava-horse, Dhanvantari, 
Surabhi--cow and Parijat- tree emerged from the ocean. Ultimately, Goddess 
Lakshmi manifested herself. The deities requested her to dwell in the heart of 
Lord Vishnu and bless all the three worlds by her presence. Goddess Lakshmi 
agreed and blessed them. 
NRISIMHA—INCARNATION 
Continuing with the various incarnations of Lord Vishnu, Lord Mahadeva told 
Parvati --- Sage Kashyapa had two mighty sons from Diti--Hiranyakashipu and 
Hiranyaksha. Hiranyaksha had once carried the earth to Rasatala. The deities 
requested Lord Vishnu to rescue the earth. 
Lord Vishnu took the incarnation of a boar and killed Hiranyaksha with his 
sharp horn. When Hiranyakshipu learnt about his brother's death he went to 
Merugiri mountain and started doing penance to please me (Lord Shiva). I 
blessed him with immortality, Later on, Hiranyakashipu married Uttanpad's 
daughter--Kalyani and had a son named Prahlada from her. In spite of being 

101 
 



born in the clan of a demon, Prahlada proved to be an extremely religious 
child and was a supreme devotee of Lord Vishnu. 
When Hiranyakshipu came to know about Prahlada's religious tendency, he 
tried his best to stop him from worshipping Vishnu. But, all his efforts went in 
vain and Prahlada continued to worship Lord Vishnu.Hiranyakashipu 
instructed his subordinates to kill Prahlada but each time he came out 
unharmed. One day, Hiranyakashipu pulled out his sword and said---'You say 
that Vishnu is omnipresent. Is he present in this pillar?' Having said like this he 
assaulted the pillar with his sword. Suddenly to his sheer amazement, Lord 
Vishnu manifested himself from that pillar in the form of Nrisimha. 
Hiranyakashipu had been blessed by Lord Shiva that he could be killed neither 
by a man nor a beast. No weapon could harm him. He could be killed neither 
during the day nor during the night. Hiranyakashiu had taken into 
consideration all the possible threat perceptions to his life and tried to 
become immortal. But, Lord Vishnu takes incarnation to protect the humanity 
whenever religiousness is under threat. This time, Lord Vishnu took 
incarnation as Nrisimha (partly lion and partly human) and tore apart his belly 
with his sharp nails. After the death of Hiranyakashipu, Prahlada was 
coronated as his successor. Prahlada ruled justly and his subject were happy 
and satisfied. 
VAMANA--INCARNATION  
Continuing with the various incarnations of Lord Vishnu, Lord Mahadeva told 
Parvati --- Prahlada had a son named Virochan. The most benevolent king--
'Mahabahu-Bali' was Virochan's son. Bali had defeated the deities and ruled 
over all the three worlds. Sage Kashyapa commenced the most austere 
penance--Payovrata to help the deities regain their lost kingdom (heaven) 
once again. He was accompanied by his wife--Aditi in his penance which lasted 
for one thousand years. At last, Lord Vishnu became pleased by their penance 
and appeared before them. Sage Kashyapa narrated the woeful tales of the 
deities and requested him to make Indra the Lord of all the three worlds. Lord 
Vishnu promised that he would take incarnation as Vamana. In course of time, 

102 
 



Aditi became pregnant and ultimately gave birth to Lord Vamana. Lord 
Vamana appeared in the form of a 'Brahmchari'. He wore a deer--Skin and 
carried a stick and a 'mekhala' in both his hands. Lord Vishnu enquired the 
deities about the future course of action. The deities informed him that Bali 
was busy performing a yagya and he would not turn down any demand made 
to him because if he did so there was a fear of loosing all his virtues attained 
by the performance of the yagya.Lord Vamana went to the oblation site 
where Bali was performing a yagya and demanded a small piece of land 
measured by his three steps. Bali agreed to meet the demand of his guest 
inspite of Shukracharya's warning. Bali resolved to donate land by holding holy 
water in his palm. Now, Lord Vamana abandoned his dwarfish form and 
appeared in a giant form. He measured the whole earth by his first step. Lord 
Vishnu then measured the whole sky by his second step. The helpless Bali 
agreed to donate all the three worlds to protect his vow. 
Ultimately, Lord Vishnu sent Bali to the Rasatala and thus Indra became the 
ruler of heaven once again. 
SRI RAMA'S BIRTH  
Describing about Sri Rama's incarnation Lord Mahadeva told Parvati--' 
Once, Swayambhuva Manu had expressed his desire of having Lord Vishnu as 
his son to which Lord Vishnu had agreed. During Treta Yuga Manu manifested 
himself as Dasharath and Vishnu kept his promise by taking birth as his son--
Sri Rama. Similarly, during Dwapar Yuga Manu was born as Vasudev and Lord 
Vishnu kept his word by taking birth as his son--Krishna. After the completion 
of one thousand divine years, Manu will be born in the village of Sambhal as 
Harigupta and Vishnu will take birth as his son--'Kalki'. 
Lord Shiva then continued with the incarnation of Sri Rama and said--'Sage 
Vishrava was the son of Pulasya and was married to Kekashi. Ravana and 
Kumbhakarna were born to the couple. 
Sage Vishrava also had a daughter named Shurpanakha and a virtuous son 
named Vibhishan.Ravana and Kumbhakarna did austere penance to please me 

103 
 



(Lord Shiva). When I appeared before Ravana he requested the boon of 
immortality from me. After receiving the boon, Ravana became very arrogant 
and started tormenting the inhabitants of all the three worlds. The deities 
became scarred and took the refuge of Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu assured them 
that he would solve their problem by taking incarnation as Sri Rama. 
Dasharath came from the lineage of Surya. He had three queens---Kaushalya, 
Sumitra and Kaikeyi.  
Once, Dasharath performed a Vaishnav Yagya with the objective of acquiring a 
son. 
Lord Vishnu appeared and assured him that he would take incarnation as Sri 
Rama in a short time. Lord Vishnu gave a bowl of divine kheer to Dasharath, 
which he distributed amongst his three queens. In course of time, Kaushalya 
gave birth to Sri Rama on the auspicious day of Chaitra-Navami. The deities 
and the sages rejoiced at his birth. 
SRI RAMA GROWS UP  
Continuing with the tale of Sri Rama, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati--Dasharath 
requested Vashishtha to perform the Jatkarm Sanskar of Sri Rama. In course 
of time Kaikeyi gave birth to Bharata--an incarnation of Panchajanya conch. 
Similarly, Sumitra gave birth to two sons-- Lakshman and Shatrughan. 
Lakshman was the incarnation of Sheshnag while Shatrughan was the 
incarnation of Sudershan chakra. Sri Rama and his brothers received 
education under the guidance of Sage Vashishtha. In a very short time they 
became proficient in all the scriptures and mastered various weaponaries. 
Although all the four brothers were very close to each other, yet Lakshman 
could not bear to live in Rama's separation even for a moment and was 
specially close to him. 
Sita manifested herself from the field while Janaka was ploughing it. King 
Janaka brought up Sita with great love and care. At that time, Vishwamitra 
was busy performing a grand yagya at Siddha Ashrama. But the demons 
created numerous problems and made it impossible for him to accomplish the 

104 
 



yagya. Vishwamitra went to Ayodhya and requested Dasharath to send Sri 
Rama and Lakshman along with him so that the yagya could be accomplished 
without any problems. 
Dasharath agreed to send Sri Rama and Lakshman along with 
Vishwamitra.This way, Vishwamitra returned to his hermitage acompanied by 
both the brothers. Garuda presented a pair of bow and imperishable set of 
arrows to both the brothers. 
While staying at the hermitage Sri Rama and Lakshman killed many demons 
like Taraka and Subahu. When Marich tried to disrupt the yagya, Sri Rama 
attacked him with Pavan-astra, which sent Marich flying across the sea-shore. 
Meanwhile, on learning that Janaka was performing Vajapeya yagya at 
Janakapur, Vishwamitra took Sri Rama and Lakshman to attend it. On the way 
Sri Rama liberated Ahalya who had turned into a rock after being cursed by 
her husband. 
After reaching Janakapur, Sri Rama broke Lord Shiva's bow and married Sita. 
Lakshman married Urmila. Dasharath had come to attend the marriage 
ceremony accompanied by Bharata and Shatrughan. Bharata was married to 
Mandavi while Shatrughan married Shrutkeerti. 
Meanwhile, on learning that Sri Rama had broken Shiva's bow, Parshurama 
arrived there and challenged him, but ultimately Parashurama realized about 
the divinity of Sri Rama and accepted his superiority. At last, Sri Rama, 
Lakshman, Bharata and Shatrughan returned to Ayodhya along with their 
respective consorts. 
SRI RAMA'S EXILE  
Lord Mahadeva continued with the tale of Sri Rama and told Parvati --
Dasharath wanted to appoint Sri Rama as his successor but Kaikeyi did not like 
this idea. She wanted Bharata to be made the king of Ayodhya and Sri Rama to 
be sent into exile for 14 years.  
Once, Kaikeyi had saved Dasharath's life while he was fighting a battle against 
the demons. To show his gratitude, Dasharath had promised two boons to 

105 
 



her. At that time, Kaikeyi had told Dasharath that she would make her 
demand at the appropriate time. 
This way, Dasharath was compelled by Kaikeyi to accept the two demands. As 
a result, Sri Rama was sent into exile. Bharata refused to become the king of 
Ayodhya and vowed to wait till Sri Rama returned. Dasharath could not bear 
the sorrow of Rama's separation and died in his sorrow. Bharata tried his best 
to convince Sri Rama to change his mind and accept the throne, but Sri Rama 
did not listen to his request. Bharata then brought Sri Rama's wooden-sandal 
and kept it on the throne. He vowed to spend rest of his life in austerities till 
Sri Rama returned. 
While Sri Rama was still in exile, he went to the hermitage of Sage Atri and 
received his blessings. Atri's wife- Anasuya preached Sita on the virtues of 
chastity. Sri Rama also visited hermitages of some other prominent sages like 
Sharbhanga, Suteeksha, Agastya etc.  
Once, while Sri Rama was living in Panchavati, Shurpanakha arrived there. 
Shurpanakha was Ravana's sister and wanted to marry Sri Rama, But 
Lakshman severed her nose and ears. She went to a mighty demon named 
Khar and narrated her woeful tale. Khar attacked Rama with a huge army, 
which comprised of brave warriors like TRishira Dushan etc. Rama was 
Victorious in this battle and Khar, TRishira and Dushan were killed. 
Shurpanakha went to Ravana and informed him about the misdeeds of Rama. 
Ravana was infuriated and wanted to take revenge. He abducted Sita with the 
help of Marich. When Jatayu saw Ravana carrying Sita to Lanka, he fought 
with valiance but was injured in the ensuing battle. 
Sri Rama went in search of Sita and met Jatayu, who was injured and who 
informed Rama that Sita had been abducted by the demon king Ravana. Sri 
Rama met Hanuman at the Rishyamook mountain. Later on he befriended 
Sugriva on the advice of Hanuman. Sugriva had enemity with his brother-Bali. 
Sri Rama killed Bali and made Sugriva the king. 

106 
 



Sri Rama requested Hanuman to find out the whereabouts of Sita. Hanuman 
went to Lanka and found Sita at Ashoka Vatika. He destroyed the garden and 
killed many demons including Ravana's son--Akshay Kumar. Ultimately, he was 
captured by Meghnath and taken to Ravana's court. Ravana ordered 
Hanuman's tail to be ignited. Hanuman then burnt the city of Lanka and 
returned to Sri Rama. When Sri Rama came to know about the exact location 
of Sita, he decided to attack Lanka with a huge army, which comprised of 
monkeys. The army camped at the seashore where Vibhishan came to meet 
him. 
A bridge was built across the ocean and the army reached Lanka. A fierce 
battle took place in which many demons were killed. At last, Ravana came 
forward to fight against Sri Rama but was killed. Sri Rama appointed Vibhishan 
as the king of Lanka and blessed him. Vibhishan presented his pushpak 
Vimana to Sri Rama. All of them boarded the Pushpak Vimana and flew 
towards Ayodhya. On the way Sri Rama met Bharata who was still awaiting his 
arrival at Nandigram. Sri Rama was very pleased to meet Bharata. Ultimately 
all of them returned to Ayodhya. 
SRI RAMA'S CORONATION  
Describing the coronation of Sri Rama Lord Mahadeva told Parvati--People of 
Ayodhya rejoiced at the return of Sri Rama. An auspicious day was chosen for 
his coronation and Sri Rama became the king of Ayodhya amidst the chantings 
of Vedic mantras. Sri Rama ruled over Ayodhya for one thousand years 
without any problem. Meanwhile, some ignorant people started pointing out 
fingers at the character of Sita. Sri Rama decided to abandon Sita in the forest 
to quell the rumour. Sita was pregnant at that time. Feeling pity on her 
condition, Valmiki took her to his hermitage where Sita gave birth to Lav and 
Kush. 
Meanwhile Sri Rama decided to perform Ashwamedha Yagya at the bank of 
river Gomati. But, since the yagya could not have been accomplished without 
Sita, therefore he performed the rituals seated beside a golden idol of Sita. In 
the mean time Valmiki arrived there, accompanied by Sita. He requested Sri 

107 
 



Rama to accept Sita, vouching for her chastity. Sri Rama told Valmiki-- 'I am 
confident of Sita's chastity but she will have to prove her chastity for the 
satisfaction of common people.'Sita was deeply hurt by Sri Rama's unkind 
remarks. She said--'May mother earth swallow me if I ever had thought about 
any man other than my Lord Sri Rama.' Hardly had Sita finished her lines than 
the earth cracked and Sita vanished into that crevice. Sri Rama's heart was 
filled with remorse but thinking that it was perhaps in his destiny to live in 
separation with Sita, returned to Ayodhya accompanied by Lav and Kush. In 
course of time, Kaushalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi left for heavenly abode. Sri 
Rama continued to rule Ayodhya for 10,000 more years. 
One day, Kala (death) arrived and reminded Sri Rama that the time had 
arrived for him to leave his mortal body. Meanwhile Lakshman became aware 
of Sri Rama's decision of leaving his mortal body. He gave up his life by taking 
samadhi in river Saryu. Sri Rama could not bear the sorrow caused by 
Lakshman's bereavment. He appointed Lav and Kush as the kings of 
Dwarawati and Kushawati respectively and decided to leave for heavenly 
abode. Sri Rama entered the water of river Saryu, flowing at the distance of 
three yojans from Ayodhya. 
SRI KRISHNA  
Parvati requested Lord Mahadeva to narrate the divine tales of Vasudeva 
Krishna. Lord Mahadeva replied--Vasudev was the descendant of yadu. His 
father was Devameedha. He was married to Devaki--the daughter of 
Ugrasena.Ugrasena also had a mighty son named Kansa. 
Kansa was extremely affectionate towards his sister Devaki. After her 
marriage, while Devaki was going to her husband's house on a chariot being 
driven by Kansa, suddenly a heavenly voice was heard. 
'Kansa, you would meet death at the hands of Devaki's eighth son.' Kansa 
became very scarred and wanted to kill his sister then and there. But, Vasudev 
requested Kansa to spare Devaki's life and promised to hand over any child 
that she gave birth to. Thus Kansa imprisoned both Vasudev and Devaki.In 

108 
 



course of time, Devaki gave birth to seven sons and Kansa killed each of them. 
Lord Sri Hari manifested himself when Devaki conceived for the eighth time. It 
was the month of Shravana and the day was 'Krishna-ashtami' when Sri Hari 
took his incarnation at midnight. Soon after taking his incarnation he gave a 
glimpse of his divine form to Vasudev and Devaki. On the instruction of Sri 
Hari, Vasudeva carried the infant to Nand's house. He had no problem in 
moving out of the prison as all the guards had fallen asleep due to the illusion 
of Sri Hari. 
On seeing the swift currents of overflooded yamuna, Vasudev became 
worried. But the level of river Yamuna receded as soon as Sri Krishna touched 
the river with his feet. Sheshnag protected Sri Krishna from heavy rain with his 
thousand hoods. When Vasudev reached Nand's house he found that Nand's 
wife-- Yashoda had given birth to a baby girl. Yashoda was sleeping at that 
time and Vasudev had no problem in exchanging Sri Krishna with that baby 
girl. Vasudev then returned to the prison and laid down the baby girl beside 
Devaki. 
The baby-girl started crying and the guards immediately woke up. They 
informed Kansa about the birth of Devaki's eighth child. Kansa tried to kill that 
baby girl by smashing her head, but she escaped from his hands and flew up in 
the sky. She thundered---'Your death is certain as your assasin has already 
taken birth.' Kansa was terrified at the prospect of his death. He instructed his 
soldiers to kill all the infants' whereever they were to be found in his kingdom. 
He also ordered the release of Vasudev and Devaki, as there was no point 
keeping them in captivity. Meanwhile, Sri Krishna grew up under the 
guardianship of Nand and Yashoda. 
One day Kansa sent a wicked ogress named Putna to kill Sri Krishna. Putma 
had applied poison on her breasts and tried to kill Krishna by breast-feeding 
him. Sri Krishna sucked her breast with such ferocity that she died. Thus, Sri 
Krishna gave the first glimpse of his divinity to the inhabitants of Vajra. Sri 
Krishna accomplished many such divine deeds during his childhood. He grew 
up to be a mischieveous child and used to play numerous pranks on the fellow 

109 
 



Gopis. He used to steal their butter and curd. One day, all the Gopis 
complained to Yashoda about Sri Krishna's misdeeds. Yashoda became angry 
and tied him with a wooden-mortar in order to prevent him from troubling 
the Gopis. She then placed that mortar between two trees so that Krishna 
could not move. But, Sri Krishna toddled away uprooting both the huge trees. 
Once, a demon named Bakasur disguised himself as a huge heron and tried to 
kill Sri Krishna. 
But, Sri Krishna hit him with a stone with such force that he met an instant 
death. This way Sri Krishna had killed many ferocious demons while he was 
still a small child. Some of them well Kaliya--the serpent etc, Dhenukasur, 
Arisht, Keshi etc. A significant incident had occurred during Krishna's 
childhood. People of Vraja were devotees of Indra and used to worship him. 
Sri Krishna stopped this tradition and encouraged people to worship 
Govardhan mountain. Indra became extremely furious and caused incessant 
rain for one week. Sri Krishna protected the people by lifting Govardhan 
mountain and shielding them from the continuous downpour. At last, Indra 
accepted defeat and eulogized Sri Krishna. 
KILLING OF KANSA  
Continuing with the divine tales of Sri Krishna, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati--
When Kansa failed in his repeated attempts to kill Sri Krishna, he instructed 
'Akrura' to invite both Krishna and Balarama to Mathura on the pretext of 
attending a ceremony called Dhanush-yagya. Kansa had planned to kill Sri 
Krishna by deceitful means. Akrura was a great devotee of Sri Krishna and was 
aware of Kansa's evil intentions. But, he had no other option but to follow the 
command of his master Kansa. So, Akrura went to Vraja where Sri Krishna and 
Balarama used to live. 
Sri Krishna and Balarama were delighted to meet Akrura. After the formal 
exchange of pleasantaries, Krishna took Akrura to his home. Akrura conveyed 
the instructions of Kansa to Nanda and requested him to send both Sri Krishna 
and Balarama to Mathura. Akrura said--'Sri Krishna is the incarnation of Lord 

110 
 



Vishnu and Kansa will be killed by him.'Nanda and Yashoda were reluctant to 
send Sri Krishna to Mathura but Sri Krishna convinced them, Ultimately. 
Akrura returned to Mathura accompanied by Krishna and Balarama. The 
people of Vraja became sad when the time for Krishna's departure to Mathura 
arrived. 
When Akrura reached Mathura accompanied by Sri Krishna and Balarama it 
was already evening. Sri Krishna saw a dyer with colourful apparels going 
towards Kansa's palace. Sri Krishna playfully demanded some set of clothes 
from that dyer which he refused to give. Sri Krishna was infuriated and 
slapped him so hard that he started vomiting blood. In a short time the dyer 
was dead. Sri Krishna and Balarama chose some beautiful set of clothes for 
themselves and proceeded towards the palace of Kansa. After sometime they 
met a crooked woman carrying 'sandal-wood-paste'. Sri Krishna demanded 
some sandal wood paste from her, which she gave without any hesitation. Sri 
Krishna blessed that crooked woman as a result of which she was cured of her 
physical--deformity. 
At last, both Sri Krishna and Balarama reached the oblation--site where 
'Dhanush-yagya' was suppossed to be performed. Sri Krishna lifted the divine 
bow kept there and broke it into two pieces. When Kansa learnt that the 
divine bow had been broken, he ordered Chanur to kill Krishna in a wrestling-
bout. Kansa also fortified his palace by positioning wild elephants and mighty 
warriors at all the entrance-points. Sri Krishna and Balarama spent the night at 
the oblation-site. In the morning both of them proceeded towards the palace. 
Sri Krishna found an elephant named Kuvalyapeeda standing at the main 
entrance of the palace. He killed that ferocious elephant without much 
difficulty. 
Sri Krishna and Balarama then entered the gymnasium where wrestling-bouts 
were supposed to take place. All the demons those who had witnessed Sri 
Krishna killing that huge elephant without any problem, became terrified and 
fled away from the gymnasium. Sri Krishna and Balarama entered the 
chamber of Kansa. Kansa became terrified and ordered his trusted 

111 
 



lientenants--Chanur and Mushtik to kill Krishna.Chanur confronted Sri Krishna 
while Mushtik fought a duel with Balarama. Ultimately, both the demons were 
killed after a fierce duel. Now, Kansa was left all alone, Sri Krishna pulled 
Kansa from the throne where he was sitting and slapped him so hard that he 
fell down on the ground. The injury proved to be fatal and as a result Kansa 
died. Balarama also killed Kansa's younger brother whose named was 
Sunama. 
After killing Kansa, Krishna and Balarama went to meet their parents--Vasudev 
and Devaki. 
They also freed their maternal grandfather- Ugrasena who had been 
imprisioned by Kansa. At last they appointed Ugrasena as the king of Mathura. 
JARASANDH  
Jarasandh was the father-in-law of Kansa. When he learnt about Kansa' death 
he surrounded Mathura with a huge army. Sri Krishna was well aware of 
Jarasandh's might and bravery. He was also convinced that it would not be 
easy to defeat Jarasandh. So, he remembered Daruk--his eternal charioteer 
and sought his help. Daruk appeared with a divine chariot named Sugriva-- 
pushpak. The chariot was well armed with all the divine weapons of Lord 
Vishnu. 
Sri Krishna and Balarama then entered the battlefied mounted on that divine 
chariot. A fierce battle was fought between Sri Krishna and Jarasandh's army. 
Jarasandh covered Krishna chariot with his various weapons but Sri Krishna 
destroyed them with his 'Chakra'. Sri Krishna then destroyed Jarasandh's army 
by showering volley of arrows from his famous bow--Sharang. 
Seeing the death and destruction in his army, Jarasandh came forward to fight 
Balarama. 
Balarama attacked Jarasandh with his dangerous weapon--Hala (plough) and 
destroyed his chariot. Jarasandh fell down on the ground and as Balarama was 
about to kill him Sri Krishna requested Balarama not to kill Jarasandh. After 

112 
 



being defeated, Jarasandh sought the help of Kalyan, who had a large army. 
Kalyavan agreed to help Jarasandh and surrounded Mathura with his army. 
Realizing that Mathura was no longer a safe place to live, Sri Krishna shifted 
the whole population of Mathura to Dwarka and went to fight Kalyavan. The 
battle continued for a long period and after realizing that it was not easy to 
defeat his enemy, Sri Krishna, ran towards the cave where 'Muchkund' had 
been sleeping since many past eras. Muchkund was blessed with a boon 
according to which any person upon whom he put his glance after waking 
from his sleep would die. Krishna hid himself behind Muchkund. Kalyavan, 
who was chasing Krishna, entered the cave and kicked Muchkund. Muchkund 
opened his eyes and saw Kalyavan. Kalyavan was burnt to ashes. This way, Sri 
Krishna was able to defeat his powerful enemy by his cleverness. 
ABDUCTION OF RUKMINI  
Lord Mahadeva told Parvati--- When Jarasandh learnt about Kalyavan's death, 
he attacked Balarama to avenge his friend's death. But, very soon he realized 
that it was beyond his capacity to defeat Balarama, so he retreated alongwith 
his army. Sri Krishna and Balarama returned to Dwarka.In course of time, 
Balarama married Revati--the daugher of Raivat. At that time, there ruled a 
king named Bhismak. He ruled over Vidarbha. He had a beautiful daughter 
named Rukmini. He also had many sons among whom Rukmi was prominent. 
Rukmi wanted Rumini to get married to Shishupal much against her wishes. 
Rukmini being an incarnation of Goddess Lakshmi rightly wanted o have Sri 
Krishna as her husband. Rukmini sent a message to Sri Krishna about her 
brother's intention. Sri Krishna went to help her, accompanied by Balarama. 
Sri Krishna reached Vidarbha on the same day, Rukmini was supposed to 
marry Shishupal and abducted her to Dwarka. Jarasandh and Rukmi chased 
Krishna's chariot but Balarama defeated Jarasandh while Sri Krishna fastened 
Rukmi with the chariot. Sri Krishna also shaved off Rukmi's hair, which filled 
him with so much of shame that he decided not to return to Vidarbha.After 
reaching Dwarka, Sri Krishna married Rukmini on an auspicious day. 

113 
 



SRI KRISHNA'S QUEENS  
Continuing with the divine tales of Sri Krishna, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati--Sri 
Krishna had 16 thousand queens among whom Satyabhama, Kalindi, 
Mitravinda, etc. were prominent. King Sattajit had a priceless diamond 
named--Syamantak, which he had presented to his younger brother--Prasena. 
Sri Krishna was fascinated by that diamond and demanded it from Prasena, 
which he refused to part with. 
One day, Sri Krishna alongwith Prasena and other Yadavas went into the forest 
for hunting. 
While chasing a deer, Prasena seceded from his group and was killed by a lion. 
The lion took the diamond and started playing with it. Incidentally, Jambavan--
who had once fought along with Sri Rama against Ravana, saw the lion playing 
with the diamond. He killed that lion and took the diamond in his 
possession.When Sri Krishna returned to Dwarka, he was surprised by a 
strange rumour, which pervaded the whole city. Some people suspected that 
Sri Krishna had killed Prasena for the diamond. Sri Krishna was very much 
distributed by this baseless rumour. To clear the doubts, he went into the 
forest accompanied by all the residents of Dwarka and showed the dead body 
of Prasena, which was still lying there. When people saw the mutilated corpse 
of Prasena, which bore marks of the lion's claws and canines, they became 
convinced of Sri Krishna's innocense. 
While returning back to Dwarka, Sri Krishna saw an effulgent cave. Sri Krishna 
was very surprised and wanted to find out the source of light. He entered the 
cave and saw Prasena's diamond hanging on top of a cradle, in which a child 
was lying. A woman was singing a lulaby so that the child falls asleep---'The 
lion killed Prasena while Jambavan killed the lion and acquired this diamond 
from its possession. O child! Don't cry as this priceless diamond belongs to 
your father.'Sri Krishna furiously blew his conch. Jambavan came out from the 
cave after listening to the sound of the conch. A fierce duel took place 
between them, which continued for ten days. At last, Jambavan realized that 
the person against whom he was fighting was none other than Sri Rama 

114 
 



himself. Jambhavan then gave his daughter--Jambavati to Krishna in marriage 
and gave lot of wealth as dowry including that 'Syamantak' diamond. 
Bhadraraj had three daughters--Sulakshamana, Nagnajiti and Susheela. Sri 
Krishna had married all three of them in a 'Swayamwara'. This way, Sri Krishna 
had altogether eight prominent queen consorts-- Rukmini, Satyabhama, 
Kalindi, Mitravinda, Jambavati, Nagnajiti, Sulakshamana and Susheela. 
There lived a mighty demon named Narakasur. He had defeated the deities 
and snatched the divine earrings of Aditi--the mother of deities. He had 
created an aerial city in which he lived alongwith other demons. The deities 
went to Sri Krishna and sought his help. Sri Krishna flew up in the sky mounted 
on the back of Garuda. Satyabhama was also accompanying him. Sri Krishna 
was amazed to see the well fortified palace of Narakasur. When the demons 
saw Srikrishna, they attacked him but Sri Krishna challenged them by blowin 
his conch. Narakasur came forward to fight Sri Krishna. A fierce battle took 
place in which Sri Krishna broke Narakasur's bow with his arrows. Ultimately, 
Sri Krishna was successful in killing Narakasur. 
Sri Krishna then returned the whole wealth to the deities, which Narakasur 
had looted from them. He also liberated sixteen thousand women whom 
Narakasur had imprisoned. After being liberated all the women accepted Sri 
Krishna as their husband. 
ANIRUDHA MARRIES USHA  
Lord Mahadeva continued with the divine tales of Sri Krishna--O Parvati! Sri 
Krishna had a son from Rukmini whose name was 'Aniruddha'. Aniruddha was 
very brave and had killed a demon named Shambasur. There is an interesting 
tale how Aniruddha married Usha. 
Once, Usha--the daughter of Banasur, saw a very handsome young man in her 
dreams. She was so infatuated by his handsome personality that she 
developed a deep desire of marrying him. 
When she woke up next morning, she expressed her desire to her companion-
-Chitralekha. 

115 
 



Chitralekha was an accomplished painter. She drew a sketch of a handsome 
man as per the descriptions of Usha. When the painting was ready, 
Chitralekha revealed to Usha that the preson who she had seen in her dream 
was none other than Aniruddha.Chitralekha had divine powers. She went to 
Dwarka and abducted Aniruddha while he was asleep. She then carried 
Aniruddha and laid him on the bed of Usha. When Usha woke up, she was 
thrilled to see the man of her dreams. Aniruddha remained there for many 
days without Banasur being aware of his presence. One day, Banasur came to 
know about Aniruddhas' presence. He became furious and imprisoned 
Aniruddha. Sage Narada informed Sri Krishna about Aniruddha's 
imprisonment. Sri Krishna went to fight a battle against Banasur and release 
Aniruddha from his imprisonment. Although Sri Krishna was leading a large 
army and was accompanied by mighty warriors like Baldeva and Pradyumna 
yet he was aware that it was not easy to fight Banasur who had one thousand 
arms and whom Lord Shiva had vowed to protect. 
A fierce battle commenced between the armies of Sri Krishna and Lord Shiva. 
The battle remained indecisive for a long time. Meanwhile, Banasur came 
forward to fight against Sri Krishna. Very soon Sri Krishna severed all the 
thousand hands of Banasur with his 'chakra'. Lord Shiva then requested Sri 
Krishna to spare Banasur's life and said -'Banasur has received the boon of 
immortality from me. Now, only you can protect the dignity of my boon given 
to him.' Sri Krishna spared Banasur's life. Banasur then agreed to marry his 
daughter to Aniruddha. This way Aniruddha married Usha with great fanfare. 
THE DECLINE OF YADU DYNASTY  
Parvati was listening to the divine tales of Sri Krishna with rapt attention. Lord 
Mahadeva told Parvati-- 'Paundrak was the king of Kashi. He did an austere 
penance for twelve years to please me. When I appeared before him, he 
requested me to make his appearance look like Sri Krishna. 
I blessed him with an appearance similar to that of Sri Krishna. People became 
confused as to who the real Krishna was. 

116 
 



One day, Narada arrived at Kashi and castigated Paundrak by saying that his 
intention of befooling people would not meet success as long as real Krishna 
was alive. Paundrak went to Dwarka with a large army and challenged Sri 
Krishna for a duel. Sri Krishna severed the impersonator's head with his 
chakra. Meanwhile, Jarasandh continued to torment the yadavas. Sri Krishna 
decided to settle the matter for once and all. He advised Bhima to challenge 
Jarasandh for a wrestling-bout. 
Jarasandh and Bhima fought valiantly for 27 days. While both of them were 
fighting, Sri Krishna signalled Bhima to tear apart Jarasandh's thighs. After the 
killing of Jarasandh, Sri Krishna released all the kings who had been 
imprisoned by him. After the great war of Mahabharata had ended, 
Yudhisthira decided to perform a Rajasuya-yagya at Indraprashth. Sri Krishna 
also went there to bless the Pandavas. Shishupal was also present at the 
ceremony. He had an old grudge against Sri Krishna and started abusing him. 
Initially Krishna tried to overlook his abuses but when situation went beyond 
repair Sri Krishna severed his head with his chakra. 
Dantavaktra attacked Mathura to avenge the death of Shishupal. A long battle 
was fought at the bank of river yamuna, which continued for many days. 
Ultimately, Sri Krishna was successful in killing Dantavaktra with his mace. 
There was a childhood friend of Sri Krishna whose name was Sudama. He was 
a poor Brahmin.  
Once, he went to meet Sri Krishna. Sri Krishna, being an incarnation of the 
almighty immediately understood the precarious situation his poor friend was 
living in. He blessed Sudama as a result of which he got rid of his poverty and 
became prosperous. Sri Krishna had one crore sons from his sixteen thousand 
queens. Pradyumna was his eldest son. The Yadavas dominated the whole 
earth and had become arrogant after being intoxicated by their power. There 
is an interesting tale how this powerful Yadava dynasty met their downfall --  
Once, some young Yadavas played a prank with Sage Kanva, which caused the 
downfall of the Yadavas. One day, some Yadva children went at the bank of 
river Narmada where sage Kanva was doing penance. Samba was one of those 

117 
 



Yadava children. He disguised himself as a pregnant woman by keeping a 
pestle under his clothes. All the Yadava children then went near Sage Kanva 
and asked him as to when was the pregnant woman supposed to deliver a 
child. Sage Kanva furiously cursed them that the whole clan of Yadavas would 
be liquidated because of that very pestle. All the children were scarred and 
told Sri Krishna about the mistake they had made. 
Sri Krishna ordered that the iron pestle be crushed to powder and be thrown 
into a pond. But, that was not the end of the matter, as long reeds grew all 
around the pond. The reeds had very sharp edges. A fish swallowed a small 
part of that iron pestle and was subsequently caught by a fowler, who 
retrieved that iron-piece from the fish and fixed it on the top of his arrow. 
In course of time all the Yadavas developed enemity among themselves and 
killed each other with those sharp-edged reeds.  
Once, Sri Krishna was taking rest under the shade of 'Kalpa' tree. 
The fowler mistook his pink foot to be that of a deer and pierced it with his 
arrow. When the fowler arrived at the spot he found Sri Krishna in an injured 
condition. The fowler regretted his action and begged for Sri Krishna's pardon. 
Sri Krishna consoled the fowler by saying that he had committed no crime. 
Meanwhile, Daruk arrived there on his chariot. Sri Krishna instructed Daruk to 
call Arjuna as soon as possible. Arjuna arrived at the site within a short time. 
Sri Krishna told Arjuna--'The time for my final departure has arrived. Please 
call all my eight queen consorts.' Arjuna rushed towards Dwarka to summon 
the queens but Sri Krishna had already left for his heavenly abode before he 
could come back with the queens. Arjuna informed the queens about Sri 
Krishna's injury. In a short time the news spread like a wild fire and all the 
residents of Dwarka rushed towards the site of incident. After reaching there, 
the eight queens of Krishna found that their beloved husband had already 
departed. All of them gave up their lives and united with Sri Krishna. The great 
Yadavas like Vasudev, Ugrasena and Akrura followed suit. Balarama could not 
bear the sorrow caused by Sri Krishna's separation and he gave up his life. His 
wife-- Revati entered the burning pyre with her husband's body in her lap. 

118 
 



Similarly all the rest of Sri Krishna's family members like Rukmi's daughter, 
Pradyumna, Usha and Aniruddha left for heavenly abode. 
Arjuna performed the last rite of all the dead Yadavas. Eventually, Dwaraka 
got submerged into the ocean. Thus, Sri Krishna after having liberated the 
earth from all the sinners left his mortal body. After completing his story Lord 
Mahadeva told Parvati that Sri Krishna takes incarnation whenever there is 
predominance of sin or sinners. He also revealed to her that Sri Krishna would 
incarnate as Kalki at the fag end of Kali Yuga to liquidate the 'mlechchhas'. 
RITUALS OF VISHNU WORSHIP 
Describing about the rituals connected with the worship of Lord Vishnu, Lord 
Mahadeva told Parvati-- A devotee can worship Lord Vishnu by making his 
idol. This mode of worship is known as 'Sthapita' (installation of an idol). There 
are also some sacred places related with Lord Vishnu which are called 
'Swayam-Vyakata' (self manifested) like Indradyumna Sarovar, (Kurma sthan), 
Kashi, Prayag, Dwarka, Naimisharanya, Mathura etc. In all these holy places, 
Lord Vishnu had manifested himself. A devotee should get up early in the 
morning and perform 'achaman'. He should then chant the holy name of Lord 
Vishnu. He should take his bath and sit down to worship Lord Vishnu. 
A devotee should install idols of Lakshmi-Narayana on a beautiful pedestal 
and adorn it with flowers. He should then make offerings of various articles 
like akshat, fruits, flowers, etc. to the deity. While worshipping, it is most 
necessary that a devotee followes the rituals as mentioned in the ancient 
scriptures like Shruti, Smriti, Vedas etc. He should chant the shlokas of 
PurushaSukta as well as the cryptic mantra for the accomplishment of 
'Shodashopachar'. He should light a ghee lamp and make offerings of articles 
like camphor and betel leaves to Lord Vishnu. While making offerings in the 
sacrificial-fire, chanting of a shloka either from Purushasukta or Srisukta is 
mandatory. 

119 
 



There are some specific days which are considered to be specially auspicious 
for the worship of Lord Vishnu--Amavasya, Saturday, solar eclipse, lunar 
eclipse etc. 
LORD VISHNU--THE ALMIGHTY GOD  
Describing about the superiority of Lord Vishnu among the trinity Gods' Sage 
Vashishtha narrated the following tale--During ancient times, Swayambhuva 
manu had once gone to Mandarachal mountain to perform a yagya. Many 
scholars and learned men had come to attend that yagya. Very soon, they got 
into a debate as to who was the supreme among all the deities. 
Some of them eulogised the greatness of Brahma, while some said that Lord 
Shiva was the greatest of all the deities. Failing to come to any conclusion all 
of them requested Sage Bhrigu to find out as to who was the greatest among 
the trinity Gods. 
Sage Bhrigu went to meet Lord Shiva at Kailash mountain. He saw Nandi 
standing guard at the main entrance. Sage Bhrigu arrogantly ordered Nandi to 
inform Lord Shiva of his arrival. Nandi refused to comply with Bhrigu's 
command. Sage Bhrigu cursed Lord Shiva by saying--Your master- Shiva, would 
bear the consequences of showing disrespect to me. From today onwards 
people would make offerings of forbidden articles to him.' Sage Bhrigu then 
went to meet Lord Brahma. After reaching Brahmaloka, he made salutations 
to Lord Brahma.Lord Brahma also did not give any respect to Sage Bhrigu and 
neglected him. Sage Bhrigu became furious and cursed Lord Brahma---'Being 
intoxicated by your Rajoguna, you have shown disrespect to me. From today 
onwards people will not worhsip you.' Sage Bhrigu then went to meet Lord 
Vishnu at his abode- Ksheersagar. He did not have any problem in reaching 
the place where Lord Vishnu was taking rest on Sheshnag, engrossed in his 
yoganidra. 
Goddess Lakshmi was pressing Vishnu's legs with total devotion. Sage Bhrigu 
kicked Lord Vishnu on his chest. Lord Vishnu woke up and seeing sage Bhrigu 
said---'O Great Brahmin! Your tender foot must have got hurt because of my 

120 
 



chest, which is as hard as Vajra. How blessed I am to have been touched by a 
Brahmin's foot.' Lord Vishnu got up and eulogised Sage Bhrigu. This gesture of 
Lord Vishnu made Sage Bhrigu cry in joy. Now, he was convinced as to who 
was the supreme among all the three deities. Sage Bhrigu returned to 
Mandarachal mountain where all the sages were anxiously waiting for him. 
He declared-- 'Lord Brahma is the possesser of Rajoguna, while Lord Shiva 
possesses tamoguna. Only Lord Vishnu is the proud possessor of Satvaguna 
and hence He is the supreme among all three of them.' After finishing his tale, 
Sage Vashishtha told the sages that anybody who worships Lord Vishnu with 
complete faith and total devotion become liberated from all his sins. A 
devotee of Lord Vishnu attains to Vishnu Loka after his death. 
PARSHURAMA  
Describing Lord Vishnu's incarnation as Parshurama, Lord Mahadeva told 
Parvati--Sage Jamadagni came from the lineage of Bhrigu. He had pleased 
Indra by his tremendous penance and received Surabhi cow in return. In 
course of time he married the daughter of king Renuk whose name was 
Renuka. A child was born to them, who was named 'Rama' by Sage Bhrigu. 
The child was also known as 'Jamadganya' because of Jamdagni. 
After growing up, Rama became proficient in all the scriptures. He also 
mastered various weaponaries. One day, the king of Haihaya named Arjuna 
arrived at the hermitage of Jamadagni. 
Sage Jamdagni treated the king with due honor and respect. He presented 
numerous gifts to the king. Arjuna wanted nothing else but the Surabhi--cow 
from Sage Jamdagni which he was unwilling to part away with. Ultimately, 
Arjuna forcibly took away the divine cow. The cow was unwilling to go 
alongwith Arjuna and she attacked his army with her sharp horns. As a result, 
Arjuna's whole army was liquidated within no time. The revengeful Arjuna 
killed Jamadagni. At the time of this incident. Rama was not present in the 
hermitage. 

121 
 



Rama wanted to avenge his father's death and did a tremendous penance to 
please Lord Vishnu. 
Lord Vishnu became pleased by his devotion and presented many divine 
weapons to him. The weapons included the famous axe--Parshu and Vaishnav-
bow. After acquiring Parshu from Lord Vishnu, Rama became famous as 
Parshurama. He had vowed to kill all the Kshatriyas, which he did only, the 
clan of Ikshavaku was spared by him as he had promised his mother that he 
would not harm Ikshavaku and his clan. 
After freeing the earth from the terror of Kshatriyas, Parshurama performed 
an Ashwamedha Yagya and donated his whole kingdom, to the Brahmins. He 
then went to do penance at the hermitage of NarNarayan. 
 Home   
  

122 
 



3. VISHNU PURANA 
PART ONE  
CHAPTER ONE  
INTRODUCTION AND ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE  
Sage Parashar, the exponent of Vishnu Purana had narrated this treatise to 
Maitreya. Sage Suta inherited it from Maitreya. The text presented here is 
narrated by Suta. 
Suta says- One day, Maitreya greeted sage Parashar and said- "Gurudev, you 
have studied all the scriptures. I wish to hear the tale of universe's origin from 
you. How will be the ages that are about to come? What is the reason for this 
whole creation? Who created it? Where did it exist? Whom did it mingle with? 
And with whom it will annihilate eventually? Apart from these, I also wish to 
hear about the expansion of fathomless sky, origin of ocean and mountains, 
origin of earth, expansion of the Sun, division of time in four ages, Pralaya, 
religion, sages, kings, creation of Vedas by Veda Vyasa, origin of four classes in 
society and system of four ashramas in one's life." Parashar says: "Maitreya, 
you have reminded me today of the description once made by my grandfather 
Vashishta. When I learnt that the monster, which was created by Vishwamitra, 
had devoured my father, I grew quite angry and started a Yagya to destroy all 
the monsters. The Yagya destroyed such a large number of monsters that the 
whole race began to face the fear of extinction. My grandfather consoled me 
that too much anger was not good and that all the monsters could not be 
blamed for my father's death. According to my grandfather my father was 
sure to face such a fate ultimately. Only the fools get angry. A human being 
bears the fruit of his deeds himself. O son! Anger destroys all the virtues of 
penance. Hence, ascetics always shun anger. Hence, stop this Yagya for 
forgiving has always been the virtue of ascetics." Thus, convinced by my 
grandfather, I stopped the Yagya. At the same time, Brahma's son, Pulastya, 
arrived there and said- "Despite your anger, you forgave the monsters when 
convinced by your grandfather Vashishta. You will learn all the scriptures and 

123 
 



give commentaries on Puranas. You will also learn the real appearance of the 
Gods". Vashishta also endorsed these words of Pulastya. 
"O Maitreya! Now I narrate to you, the whole contents of Purana. This whole 
universe has originated from Lord Vishnu. It is existing within Him and will 
annihilate in Him eventually." Parashar says: "The trinity of Brahma, Vishnu 
and Mahesh is also known as the creator, the preserver and the destroyer. All 
of them save the devotees. All of them have equal importance. 
Still, preserver who fosters and protects all the living beings is far more 
significant. I salute to Him and narrate the tale that was once narrated by 
Brahma to all the Dakshas. Dakshas had narrated this tale to the King 
Purukutsa at the bank of the river Narmada. In turn, Purukutsa narrated this 
tale to Saraswat who narrated it to me.”  
“O Brahmin! Lord is eternal and endless. Hence, origin of universe, its 
existence and annihilation are also unending processes. During the period of 
Pralaya, the nature exists in a state of equilibrium. It is during this period that 
Purusha (masculine forces of creation) separates from Prakriti (feminine 
forces of creation) and Kalroop of Vishnu (eternal, unending form of the Lord) 
is manifested. Lord Vishnu is beyond all the bonding of life like birth, growth, 
intelligence, senses, decay and death. Purusha is the first appearance of Lord 
Vishnu. Prakriti is the manifestation of His action while Kalroop is His supreme 
appearance." During the Pralaya, there was neither day nor night, neither 
earth nor sky and neither darkness nor light. At the subsidence of Pralaya, 
with His desire, the Lord entered the Purusha who is beyond all bonding. His 
entry stimulated the process of creation. First of all, a single great element 
originated encompassing all the other lesser elements. From this great 
element originated three egos- Sattvic, Rajas and Tamas. Tamas created sky 
with sound as the main virtue. The sky then created the sense of touch. Touch 
produced air. Hence, touch is the main feature of air; no one can see air but 
only have an experience of it through touch. Air created Rupa, which gave 
birth to fire with Rupa as its main virtue. Fire gave birth to taste. Taste 
produced water with taste as its main property. From water originated scent, 

124 
 



which produced earth with scent as the main feature. These senses have no 
special expression. 
The ego Rajas produced ten sense organs whereas the ruling deities of these 
organs were produced by Sattvic ego. Thus, the ten deities who rule ten sense 
organs and the eleventh entity mind are Sattvic in nature. Skin, eyes, ears, 
nose and tongue- these five organs aid the mind in its function. O Maitreya! 
Anus, sex organs, hands, legs and speech organs are the five organs that help 
in action. Works like excretion, reproduction, movement and speech are 
carried out with the help of these five organs. All the five elements like sky, 
air, fire, water and earth are full of emotions. Hence, they are also known to 
have a special significance. 
All these elements have different and distinct powers. Without their 
combination, creation of the universe was impossible. In the beginning, all 
these elements were present in the great ball or egg, which came into 
existence because of the inspiration of the Lord. As this ball increased in size, 
it formed the base as Prakriti in which, Lord Vishnu Himself entered as 
Hiranyagarbh. 
When the universe comes into existence, Lord Vishnu fosters it till the end of 
Kalpa. At the end of Kalpa, Lord Vishnu Himself devours the entire physical 
elements in Rudra appearance. 
During that time, He inundates the entire universe and Himself sleeps on 
Shesha in Ksheersagar. 
When he awakes once again, He begins the process of creation in the 
appearance of Brahma. 
 
CHAPTER TWO  
BIRTH OF BRAHMA AND EARTH SAVED BY VARAHA  
At the end of the previous Kalpa, when Brahma awakened from his long 
slumber, he saw all the worlds devoid of everything. With a desire to save the 

125 
 



earth from the depth of unfathomable inundation, He took the appearance of 
Varaha. Entering the water, He reached Patala loka. 
Seeing Him, the earth prayed Him with respect. Hearing her prayers, the Lord 
roared with frightening sound. Then, He supported the earth on His great 
incisors and came out from the abysmal depth. When He was rising, His 
breath produced big sprays of water, which drenched sinless sages while the 
force of His breath frightened common creatures. When the Lord emerged 
from the water, all the sages prayed Him with reverence and respect. 
Very soon, the Lord installed the earth at a position far above the unending 
stretches of water. 
Then, Lord carved out the topographical features on earth and divided it into 
many divisions and created all the four worlds. Then Lord Vishnu in the guise 
of Brahma carried out the process of creation. 
As soon as Brahma thought of creation, Tamoguni (full of darkness) creatures 
were the first to appear. Absence of knowledge and presence of evils like 
attachment, anger etc. were the main virtues of these creatures. These 
creatures include lower organisms, trees, shrubs, creepers, plants and grasses. 
These together constitute the primitive world. Their creation was followed by 
the appearance of animals and birds, which are devoid of wisdom and are full 
of ego. They are also unaware of the nature of another organism of their 
status. 
Still unsatisfied with His creation, Lord created the next world, which has a 
somewhat elevated position. The living beings that were produced in this 
world had internal and external knowledge, power of reflection and loved 
physical comforts. Though this creation pleased the Lord, He was still 
unsatisfied. So He created the next world, which was situated at a somewhat 
lower position. 
This new world had excess of all the three virtues. Human beings populate this 
world and because of excess of vices, they are full of sorrow but at the same 

126 
 



time, highly active, have internal and external knowledge and are able to 
attain their goals. 
The first few creations had resulted from the thoughts of the Lord. For the 
creation of the Gods, the demons, Pitraganas, human beings and water, the 
Lord decided to use His body. Thus, the demons were the first to emerge from 
His thighs. The Lord then shed His dark body, which formed the night. Then 
from His mouth, the Lord produced the Gods who had Sattvic virtues. 
The Lord then shed His Sattvic body as well from which the day came into 
being. It is also the reason why the Gods acquire more strength in day and the 
demons are stronger during nights. 
Then the Lord acquired yet another body and behaved like Pitraganas to 
produce Pitraganas before shedding that body too, which gave rise to the 
dusk- the twilight between the day and the night. Thereafter, the Lord 
acquired a new body with Rajas virtue from which the human beings were 
produced. When the Lord shed that Rajas body it formed dawn- the twilight 
between the night and the day. It also explains why the human beings are 
stronger at dawn and Pitraganas at dusk. 
Then the Lord assumed yet another body with Rajas virtues and produced 
desire from it. The desire gave birth to lust. Staying in the darkness then, the 
Lord created the world, which is full of desire and lust. In that world, many 
ugly looking human beings, who had long beard and moustache appeared and 
ran towards Him. Among those who said, 'Protect him' came to be known as 
Rakshas (demons) and those who said, 'We will eat him' came to be known as 
Yakshas. Then the angry Lord produced aggressive carnivores. Thereafter, the 
singing Lord produced Gandharvas. Thus, by turns, the Lord produced birds, 
sheep, goat, cow, horse, elephant, donkey, deer, camel, pony from His age, 
chest, mouth, belly and feet respectively. 
From the innumerable body hair of the Lord, fruits, flowers and herbs were 
produced. From His east-facing head, Lord produced Gayatri mantra, Rigveda, 
and Yagyas. From His south-facing head, He produced Yajurveda. From west-

127 
 



facing head, He produced Samaveda and from His north-facing head, He 
produced Atharvaveda. 
 
CHAPTER THIRD  
DIVISIONS OF EARTH AND ORIGIN OF CEREALS  
With the desire of creating the world, Brahma produced different kinds of 
human beings from his different organs. Thus, from his mouth, Brahmins 
appeared. Kshatriyas appeared from his chest, Vaishyas from his thighs and 
from his feet, Shudras appeared. Thus, physical body is the greatest means for 
human beings in order to achieve his goals. With time, the human beings lost 
their divine virtues and perfections. Jealousy, sorrow, decay and infighting 
began to rise among the people. In order to earn their livelihood and run their 
life peacefully, the human beings developed agriculture and other handicrafts. 
"O sage! Paddy, barley, wheat, lesser cereals, sesame, millet, rice, peas, 
pulses, beans, rye, gram flour and hemp are common agricultural produce 
that have edible as well as medicinal values in the villages. These and other 
produce are also used as oblations in the Yagyas because all of them have 
produced as a result of Yagyas. Performing Yagyas daily is the most virtuous 
exercise that every human being should undertake. This destroys the sins 
committed by common people."  
 
CHAPTER FOUR  
BIRTH OF PRAJAPATIS AND THEIR PROGENY  
At one point, the process of creation got saturated and no increase took place 
in the number of living beings. Then, with a desire of continuing the creation, 
Lord created nine sages from His thought. Then he produced nine daughters 
and handed them over as the wives to those nine sages. 
When initially produced sons of Brahma took to asceticism, He got very much 
infuriated. His anger was enough to burn all the three worlds. From this anger, 

128 
 



Rudra originated who was shining like the Sun. Rudra had appeared in half-
masculine and half-feminine form. Immediately after His appearance, Rudra 
separated His body into eleven male parts and eleven female parts. 
Then Swayambhu Manu appeared from the body of Brahma. He agreed to 
follow Brahma's dictate of continuing creation. He got a woman Shatrupa who 
had also appeared along with him. 
Together they begot two sons, Priyavrata and Utanpad and two daughters, 
Prasooti and Akooti. 
These two daughters were married to Daksha and Prajapati respectively. 
Prajapati and Akooti gave birth to twins, Yagya and Dakshaina. Yagya and 
Dakshaina got married and produced twelve sons who later on came to be 
known as Yam, the Gods. 
Daksha and Prasooti produced twenty-four daughters, thirteen of which were 
married to Dharma. 
The remaining eleven daughters were married to Bhrigu, Shiva, Marichi, 
Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, Vashishta, Agni and Pitars. From his 
thirteen wives, Dharma produced Kama, Darpa, Niyam, Santosh, Lobha, Shrut, 
Dand, Naya, Vinay, Bodh, Vyavasay, Kshema, Sukh and Yash. Kama got 
married to Rati and produced Harsh. Darpa married Hinsa and produced a son 
Anrit and a daughter Nikriti. Anrit and Nikriti got married and produced Bhaya 
and Narak and their wives Maya and Vedana. Maya produced Mrityu, the 
destroyer of all the creatures in the world. Vedana produced a son, Dukh. 
Mrityu produced Vyadhi, Jara, Shok, Trishna and Krodh. These are all the 
fierce appearances of Lord Vishnu and cause Pralaya. 
The omnipresent eternal God creates this world in the form of Manus, 
protects it and ultimately destroys it. There are four kinds of Pralaya- 
Naimittik, Prakritik, Atyantik and Nitya. Among them, Naimittik is Brahma 
Pralaya during which God takes a nap. During Prakritik Pralaya, the universe 
annihilates in nature. Annihilation of Yogi in the Supreme Being is Atyantik 

129 
 



Pralaya and a decay of physical elements that continues day and night is Nitya 
Pralaya. 
 
CHAPTER FIVE  
CREATION OF RUDRA AND OF LAKSHMI  
In the beginning of Kalpa when Brahma was thinking about a son, who would 
be like him in virtues, a boy with reddish-blue body appeared in his lap. 
Brahma addressed the boy with names like Rudra, Bhava, Shiv, Ibhan, 
Pashupati, Bhima, Ugra and Mahadeva. Brahma also fixed Surya, water, earth, 
air, fire, sky, Dikshit (graduate scholar) Brahmin and the Moon His abode. 
Since then, all these things idolise Shiv. These eleven idols of Shiv have wives 
like Suvarchala, Usha, Vikeshi, Apara, Shiva, Swaha, Disha and Rohini. 
Shanaishchar, Shukra, Lohitang, Manojav, Skand, Sarg, Santan and Buddh are 
the sons of these idols respectively. Rudra Himself got Sati, the daughter of 
Daksha Prajapati as His wife. Sati had committed self-immolation because of 
the disrespect that her father had shown for her husband. In her next birth, 
she had appeared as Parvati, the daughter of Himalaya and Maina. Parvati too 
got married to Shiv. 
Khyati got married to Bhrigu and gave birth to two sons Dhata and Vidhata 
and a daughter Lakshmi. Lakshmi then married Lord Vishnu. 
Maitreya says - "O sage! It is heard that Lakshmi was produced from 
Ksheersagar during the churning of the sea but you say that Lakshmi was the 
daughter of Bhrigu and Khyati. How is it possible?" Parashar says- "O great 
Brahmin! Lakshmi who never separates from the Lord is Herself eternal like 
Him. But still, as you have expressed your doubt, I will narrate you the real 
story." The famous short-tempered sage Durvasa is a partial incarnation of 
Shankar. One day, he was wandering on the earth when all of a sudden, he 
happened to see an extremely divine beauty. She was wearing a garland of 
beautiful flowers. The sage requested the beauty to give him that garland. She 
presented the garland respectfully to the sage. The sage adorned the garland 

130 
 



on his head and began to wander again. Right at that moment, he saw Indra 
riding on Airavat and going somewhere in the procession of the Gods. 
Instinctively, sage Durvasa put that garland around the neck of Indra but Indra 
removed it and put it on Airavat's head. Airavat pulled the garland with his 
trunk and smashed it on the ground. This whole sequence of events infuriated 
Durvasa who cursed Indra. "O Indra! You are so inebriated with your luxuries 
that you dared to insult my humble gift. Hence, all your splendour shall be 
destroyed. You will lose all your wealth."Indra at once descended from the 
elephant and began to request sage Durvasa. Durvasa said- "Indra! 
Forgiveness has no place in my personality. So, all your repenting is 
meaningless." Saying this, sage Durvasa departed from the scene and Indra to 
left for Amravati. 
Very soon, the curse began to show its influence. With the loss of Indra's 
luxuries, all the verdancy on the earth too began to wane. Hermits too began 
to give up Yagyas. All the human beings began to be guided by greed and gave 
up pious virtues. And at a place where pious virtues have no room, Lakshmi 
too doesn't stay there. 
She made her abode in the abysmal depth of the sea. Very soon, the demons 
launched an attack on the Gods and drove them out of heaven. Indra along 
with other Gods approached Brahma and told him the whole thing. Brahma 
suggested them to take refuge at Lord Vishnu. He assured them also that Lord 
Vishnu would definitely protect them. Brahma even accompanied the Gods to 
Lord Vishnu. There, they together prayed Lord Vishnu and intimated Him 
about their ordeal. 
Pleased by their prayers, Lord Vishnu appeared before them and said- "I will 
definitely help you regain your splendour. Presently, do what I say. You 
reconcile with the demons and convince them to carry out the churning of the 
sea. Then bring all kinds of herbs and put them in the sea. 
With the help of the demons and using Mandarachal as churner and Vasuki, 
the Nag as the rope to carry out the churning of the sea. Thus, you will recover 
ambrosia drinking which, all of you will become immortal and regain your 

131 
 



strength." Following the advice of Lord Vishnu, the Gods reconciled with the 
demons and convinced them to carry out the churning of the sea. They 
together procured all kinds of herbs and put them in the sea. Then they began 
the churning using Mandarachal Mountain. As soon as the churning began, 
Mandarachal began to sink. Lord Vishnu took incarnation of Kachchhap (the 
great tortoise) and bore the weight of the mighty mountain on His back. 
During the churning, Kamadhenu, the wishful cow was the first to emerge. It 
was presented to the sages as an aid for their Yagyas. It was followed by the 
damsel, Varuni, Kalpavriksha (the wishful tree) after which, beautiful elves 
appeared. The Moon followed the apsaras and was taken up by Shiva on His 
forehead. During the churning, huge quantity of poison had also emerged. It 
was drunk by Lord Shiva and some parts of it were taken up by the serpents. 
In the end, Dhanvantari himself emerged from the sea carrying the urn of 
ambrosia. 
It was during the churning itself that Lakshmi appeared once again from the 
sea holding lotuses in her hands. All the sages prayed her. Then taking bath 
with divine water, Goddess Lakshmi took her seat in the heart of Lord Vishnu. 
When the demons saw that Lakshmi had chosen Lord Vishnu's heart as her 
abode, they got perplexed. They at once snatched the urn from Dhanvantari 
and ran away. Then a row broke out among them over the drinking of 
ambrosia. Each of the demons wanted to drink ambrosia in maximum 
quantity. Meanwhile, Lord Vishnu also arrived there in the guise of an 
extremely pretty woman Mohini and took possession of the urn. Mohini had 
pleased the demons with her sweet smile while distributing ambrosia among 
the Gods.Thus, the Gods came to drink ambrosia. When at last, the demons 
realised that they had been cheated they immediately attacked the Gods. But 
since the Gods had regained their strength, they soon defeated the demons 
without much ado. Afterwards, the Gods prayed Lord Vishnu and returned to 
heaven to rule it. The world also regained its verdancy. After regaining his 
splendour, comforts and luxuries of the heaven, Indra prayed Goddess 
Lakshmi with devotion and respect. 

132 
 



Pleased by the prayers of Indra, Lakshmi asked him to seek a boon. Indra said- 
"O Goddess! If you are pleased with me, kindly bless me with a boon that first 
you will never desert this world and also that you will never desert those who 
worship you with this prayer." Lakshmi granted these boons. 
Thus, Lakshmi had appeared as the daughter of Bhrigu and his wife Khyati. 
Then second time, she emerged from beneath the sea during its churning. 
Thus, whenever Lord Vishnu takes an incarnation, Lakshmi accompanies Him. 
When God appears in divine form, she too takes a divine appearance. When 
God appears in human form, Lakshmi appears in human form also. 
 
CHAPTER SIX  
DHRUVA'S MIGRATION TO THE FOREST  
Swayambhu Manu had two sons- Priyavrata and Utanpad. Utanpad had two 
wives- Suruchi and Suniti. Suruchi had a son- Uttam while Suniti had also a 
son- Dhruva. King Utanpad loved Suruchi more than he loved Suniti. 
One day the king was sitting on the throne. Prince Uttam was playing in his 
lap. Meanwhile Dhruva also arrived there and insisted to play in the lap of his 
father. At his insistence, queen Suruchi ridiculed that as he was not born to 
her he had no right to the king's love, ... "so your insistence is useless. Though 
you are also a son of this king but this throne belongs to my son. 
Don't you know that you have been born to Suniti." Getting angry over his 
stepmother's ridicules, Dhruva went to his mother. Suniti consoled her son 
and enquired about the reason for his anger. Dhruva narrated the whole thing 
to his mother. 
Suniti too got perplexed and said: "O son! Suniti speaks the truth but you 
don't worry for no one can do away the virtues of your deeds that you 
performed in your previous birth. Hence you should not feel sorry over such 
petty things. If you feel really sorry by the words of your stepmother why 
don't you try to gather virtues? Why don't you try to be a gentle and altruistic 
person?" Thus consoled by mother Dhruva said- "Mother! Since now onwards, 

133 
 



I will do every such thing so that I may attain the most respected position in 
the world. I am no longer desirous of getting a position granted by others. I 
will achieve the same position as my father has." Saying this Dhruva left the 
palace and the town and reached a dense forest. 
Seven Munishwars (mendicants) were already present in the forest. Dhruva 
greeted them all and said very politely- "O great sages! I am the prince 
Dhruva. King Utanpad is my father and his younger queen Suniti is my mother. 
I have arrived here out of desperation." The sages said- "O prince! You are just 
a small boy. You have no reason to be worried because your father is still alive 
and neither you have any disease. What then caused you such a severe 
desperation?" Dhruva narrated the whole events and also that how his 
stepmother Suruchi ridiculed about his inferior position in the palace. The 
sages said- "O prince! Kindly tell us whatever you have decided to do to 
change your destiny and also tell us if we can help you in any way." Dhruva 
said-"O sages! I neither long for wealth or for the kingdom. I simply long to 
enjoy such a position that nobody have ever enjoyed earlier. Kindly help me 
and guide me what I should do to attain such a position." Marichi said-"O 
prince! Nobody can attain such an unparalleled position without the worship 
of Govind (an epithet of Lord Vishnu), so you also worship that eternal 
Supreme Being." Atri said- "He who is far above the tangible can only satisfy 
Him and bring you that supreme position." Angira said-"Go and worship 
Govind who holds the entire universe within Him." Pulastya said-"Even the 
wretched people attain the rare salvation worshipping Hari." Pulaha said-"Go 
and worship that Vishnu worshipping whom even Indra attained the position 
of the Gods' king." Kratu said- "Go and worship Janardana who is supreme, 
who is deity of the Yagyas and Yagya Himself." Vashishta said-"O son! You will 
attain whatever you wish by worshipping Lord Vishnu." Dhruva said - "O 
sages! At my prayers all of you told me about whom I should worship. Now 
kindly tell me what should I do to please the Lord." The sages said- "It is 
imperative for a person, who wishes to worship Lord Vishnu that first of all, he 
should expel all other menial thoughts from his mind and replace them with 
the contemplation Lord alone. O prince! Thus concentrate on that omnipotent 

134 
 



eternal Lord with the mantra - 'OM NAMO BHAGVATE VASUDEVAY'. Your 
grandfather Swayambhu Manu had himself recited this mantra during the 
previous age and had received the perfection of his desire. 
 
CHAPTER SEVEN  
DHRUVA PLEASES GOD WITH HIS PENANCE  
The prince Dhruva greeted the sages and continued on his journey. At last, he 
reached a beautiful forest Madhuvan on the bank of the river Yamuna. It was 
the same forest, which was later occupied by a demon Madhu. Shatrughana, 
the youngest brother of Lord Rama had killed the demon Lavan, the son of 
Madhu in the same forest and founded the township of Mathura. In the same 
forest, prince Dhruva decided to carry out his penance. As per the dictate of 
the sages, he began to recite the mantra continuously.Very soon, the earth 
began to move because of Dhruva's severe penance. Even the seat of Indra 
could not remain stable. A stampede resulted among the Gods. The Gods then 
hatched a conspiracy to disturb the penance. 
According to the plan an illusionary image of Suniti, Dhruva's mother 
appeared before him and pleaded - "O son! Please stop this severe penance 
that is bound to decay your body. I got you after great desires and worship. It 
is not proper for you to take your stepmother's words so seriously and desert 
your real mother. You are my only support. You are only four or five years old. 
Presently you should pay more attention to your plays and studies. Why are 
you observing such a severe penance then? O son! If you don't give up your 
penance right now I will give my life." But Dhruva was so much sunk in the 
contemplation of Lord Vishnu that he did not hear the wailing of his mother." 
His mother then said- "Run, O son! Run away to save your life. Look! 
Formidable demons are approaching. They are carrying lethal weapons." 
Suddenly that illusionary image blew out intense fire from her mouth. That 
fire took appearance of many dreadful monsters, who were shouting loudly 
like 'kill him', 'eat him'. Those monsters bore the heads of lion, camel, 

135 
 



crocodile etc. and appeared extremely formidable. The monsters were roaring 
loudly. 
But Dhruva's mind was deeply in contemplation. He neither saw the monsters 
or heard the noises made by them. Thus, seeing their all attempts failed. The 
Gods decided to take refuge at Lord Vishnu. There they said- "O Lord! We 
have come to you perplexed by the severe penance of Dhruva the son of 
Utanpad. His penance is increasing like a waxing Moon. We are not sure if he 
desires for the position of Indra, Surya, Kubera, Varuna or any other deity. But 
kindly remove our fears." Assuring the Gods, the Lord said- "That boy has no 
desire for attaining the position of any deity. 
But I will definitely grant him whatever he desires. But all of you need not 
worry." The Gods greeted the Lord and returned. 
Ultimately pleased by the severe penance of Dhruva, Lord Vishnu appeared 
before him in his formal four-armed form and said- "Dhruva! May it all be well 
for you. I am very much pleased with you." Hearing these words Dhruva 
opened his eyes and to his amazement found Lord Vishnu standing before 
him. For a moment he did not believe his eyes. Standing before him was the 
same Lord Vishnu whom he used to see in contemplation. For a moment, 
Dhruva forgot how to pray God. He then took refuge of God and said- "O Lord! 
If you are pleased with me, kindly bless me with power to pray you. My mind 
is exhilarated with devotion for you. It wishes to pray you." Hearing these 
words the Lord touched Dhruva with His conch and as soon as it happened, an 
unbinding stream of devotional prayer sprang from Dhruva's mouth. 
At the completion of the prayer Lord Vishnu said- "O son! Your penance 
succeeds with my sight but my presenting a sight should also not go waste. So 
seek a boon of your desire." Dhruva said- "O Lord! Nothing is hidden from 
your divine sight. I started this severe penance out of desperation caused by 
the harsh words of my stepmother. She had ridiculed my insistence of playing 
in my father's lap saying that as I was not born to her, I had no right to the 
king's love. 

136 
 



Hence, O Lord! I wish to attain such a position that could be the base of the 
entire universe."Lord said- "O son! You were born in a Brahmin family in your 
previous birth. Then you had pleased me by your abidance to the religion. You 
were also a friend of a prince and wished to enjoy the same royal luxuries that 
your friend was enjoying. You had in fact wished to be a prince. Hence O son! 
You are born as a prince in this birth. It is rare to get a place in the lineage of 
Swayambhu Manu. But this honor has no value for a devotee like you. O son! I 
will definitely accord you the position that is excellent among all the three 
worlds. In future you will be the base of all the planets and all the 
constellations. I grant you a fixed position that is far above the Sun, the Moon, 
the planets, constellations, SaptaRishis and all the Gods who fly about in 
divine aircraft. Besides it, you will stay there for a complete Kalpa whereas 
even the Gods do not stay in their position more than a single Manvantara. 
Your mother Suniti too will come to stay with you as a bright star for the same 
period of time. There she will stay on an aircraft. People will see you with faith 
for you will show them the right direction." Thus receiving a boon from Lord 
Vishnu, Dhruva occupied a fixed position in the northern sky. 
Even the sage like Shukracharya praises Dhruva that how fortunate he is.... 
that even SaptaRishis go around him? That pivotal position of Dhruva would 
continue even in the ages to come. 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT  
TALE OF THE KING VENA AND PRITHU  
Parashar says- " With the help of Dhruva, his wife gave birth to two sons- 
Sishti and Bhavya. 
Sishti had five sons- Ripu, Ripunjay, Vipra, Vikal and Vrikteja. Ripu had a 
brilliant son Chakshush. Chakshush had a son Manu. Manu had sons- Puru, 
Kuru, Shatadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suchi, Agnishtome, Atiratra, 
Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. Kuru had sons- Anga, Suman, Khyati, Kratu, Angira 
and Shivi. Anga had a son named Vena. The sages had churned the right hand 

137 
 



of Vena to produce a son named Vainya. He later on became renowned as 
Prithu. 
He had even milked the earth for the benefit of his subjects." Maitreya says- 
"Why did the sages churn Vena's hand? What was their purpose of getting 
Prithu?" Parashar says- "Mrityu had his first child as a daughter named 
Sunitha who was married to Anga. 
Sunitha had given birth to Vena. Vena had all the faults of his maternal 
grandfather Mrityu and hence was Devil-like in nature." At the time of his 
coronation, Vena had declared- "I am the God and the Yagya Purusha. Hence, 
in future, no one shall perform Yagyas and donate Dakshaina." The sages 
praised him and said- "O king! We speak about the benefit of you and your 
subjects. 
Through grand Yagyas, we shall worship omnipotent Lord Hari. Thus pleased, 
he will grant all your desires. O king! In the kingdom of which kings, Lord Hari 
is worshipped as the presiding deity of Yagyas, He fulfils all their desires." 
Vena said- "Who is greater than me and even venerable, whom you regard as 
the presiding deity of the Yagyas? All the deities like Brahma; Vishnu, Mahesh, 
Indra, Vayu etc. are present in the body of the king. Hence, the king has all the 
virtues of these deities. Therefore, do what I say. 
Such as a woman's duty is to serve her husband, similarly it is your duty of all 
of you to obey my dictate."The sages tried to convince Vena repeatedly but in 
vain. At last, when he did not agree to their proposal, the sages killed him. 
Immediately after killing the king, the sages saw the clouds of dust rising all 
around. It was revealed to them upon enquiry that the subjects of a king-less 
kingdom have resorted to plundering and looting each other and it was 
because of that stampede that clouds of dust were rising. 
The sages then churned the thighs of issue-less king and produced an ugly 
black man. He was feeling excited and asked the sages what he should do? 
The sages asked him to Nishid (sit down); hence he came to be known as 
Nishad. His progeny came to be known as Nishadgana. 

138 
 



Appearance of Nishad did away with all the sins of Vena. The sages then 
churned Vena's right hand and produced prowessive Prithu whose body was 
radiating like fire. As soon as he appeared, bow and arrow and shield of Lord 
Shiva descended from heaven and all the subjects felt extreme joy. With the 
birth of such a pious son, Vena attained a position in the heaven. 
For the coronation of Prithu, Brahma himself had appeared there with the 
water from all the rivers and oceans, all kinds of gems and along with all the 
deities. Presence of chakra in right hand of Prithu pleased Brahma. This chakra 
of Lord Vishnu is present in the hands of extremely dominating kings. Such a 
king remains unaffected even by the Gods. 
Thus occupying the royal throne, King Prithu was a boon for his subjects. He 
was so religious that the seas and mountains paved way for him. His flag 
always remained fresh and new. Even there was no need to sow the seeds; 
the earth herself provided all the cereals. Cows gave milk spontaneously and 
every leaf of all the trees in the kingdom was full of honey. 
Immediately after his appearance, King Prithu organised a grand Yagya. At the 
time of Somabhishek (bathing with grape-wine) during the Yagya, a man and a 
woman appeared from the earth. The sages advised them to pray King Prithu. 
With folded hands they asked that the king had arrived moments before 
them. His reputation had not spread far and wide. Why should then they pray 
such a king? The sage said that they should pray the king for the great 
achievements he would attain in future. King Prithu thought that it was 
because of merits that a man becomes praiseworthy. 'Hence I will do exactly 
the same things that this couple would recite during the prayers' thought the 
king. Thus during the later course, king Prithu planted those virtues firmly in 
his conscience and ruled the earth. During his rule, he performed many great 
Yagyas. 
During the anarchy of his father's regime, all the vegetation had been 
destroyed from all over the earth. There was nothing for the subjects to 
satisfy their hunger with. So, they approached him and said- "O great king! 
Due to the anarchy of your father's regime, the earth had annihilated all the 

139 
 



cereals within her. Your subjects have no choice but to starve. Kindly protect 
us from this condition." Pitiable condition of the subjects infuriated king 
Prithu. Taking the divine weapons of Lord Shiva, he ran after the earth. In 
guise of the cow, the earth ran in all the three worlds but wherever she went 
she found Prithu still chasing her. Thus shivering with fear, she ultimately 
appeared before him and said- "O king! Don't you see the sin in killing a 
helpless woman." Prithu said- "If killing a wretched person benefits scores of 
other people, there is no sin doing so." The earth said- "You want to kill me in 
the interest of your subjects but think what will be the base of the subject 
then?" Prithu said- "You need not worry about that. I will myself support my 
subjects." These words frightened the earth. She greeted the king and said- "O 
king! All the tasks started with a distinct purpose reach their completion 
successfully, so I am telling you a way out of the present condition. Do then, 
as you desire. I can give out all the herbs and cereals that I have annihilated in 
the form of milk. So, for the benefit of the subjects, kindly produce such a calf 
for which I can give milk spontaneously with motherly feelings. You then 
provide me with a plain surface everywhere so that I can produce milk that is 
the seed of all the cereals and herbs." King Prithu then uprooted many great 
mountains with his bow and arrow and stowed them at a single place. Before 
that there was no distinct demarcation of village, towns, cities etc. because of 
the plain surface of the earth and there was no distinct sequence of cereals, 
cows, agriculture and trade. All this systems started from the time of Prithu. 
Since then people began to populate those parts of the earth that were plain. 
For the benefit of his subjects, King Pritu himself milked all the cereals from 
earth making Swayambhu Manu a calf. It is the cereals that still sustain the 
entire population of the world. 
Since then King Prithu came to be known as the father of earth because he 
had spared her life. 
 
CHAPTER NINE  

140 
 



BIRTH OF PRACHIN BARHI AND PRACHETAS PRAY GOD  
King Prithu had two sons- Antardhan and Vadi who were very religious 
minded themselves. 
Antardhan's wife Shikhandi gave birth to Ivirdhan. Prachin Barhi was the son 
of Ivirdhan and his wife, Ghishna. Shukra, Gaya, Krishna, Vrij and Ajin were 
their other sons. Prachin Barhi was a great fosterer of his subjects. Through 
continuous oblations, he increased his subjects to great limits. 
King Prachin Barhi married again with Savarna; the daughter of Samudra and 
they together produced ten sons. All of them were known as Prachetas who 
were expert in the art of archery. 
All of them observed serious penance under the sea for 10,000 years. 
Maitreya says- O great sage! Kindly narrate to us the reason for which 
Prachetas observed severe penance under the sea. 
Parashar says-  
Once by the inspiration of Brahma, King Prachin Barhi asked his sons 
Prachetas to continue the progeny in an honored way. Prachetas agreed to 
obey the dictate of their father but they asked- O father! Kindly narrate to us, 
what should we do to enable ourselves so that we could carry out the process 
of reproduction. 
King Prachin Barhi said that worship of Lord Vishnu was the only thing that 
enabled a person to achieve his desired objectives. He dictated his sons to 
worship Lord Vishnu. It was by the dictate of the father that all the ten 
Prachetas observed severe penance for ten thousand years under the sea. At 
the end of their penance, Sri Hari appeared before them radiating with blue 
light like a freshly bloomed blue lotus. Accepting the greetings of the 
Prachetas, Lord Vishnu asked them to seek a boon. Prachetas then told the 
dictate of their father. Lord granted their boon. Thereafter all the Prachetas 
re-emerged from the waters. 
 

141 
 



CHAPTER TEN  
MARRIAGE OF PRACHETAS AND BIRTH OF PRAJAPATIS  
Parashar says- During the time when Prachetas were engaged in penance, the 
earth was unprotected. Hence, huge trees came to cover her everywhere on 
land. Their foliage was so dense they that cut off entire sky and the sun could 
not reach the surface of the earth. After their emergence from the sea, 
Prachetas got very angry when they saw the trees. In anger, they let out 
formidable flames mixed with ghastly winds and uprooted all the trees before 
reducing them to ashes. A massive destruction of the trees followed. Seeing 
that Soma, the king of the trees approached Prachetas and requested- 'O 
kings! Kindly relinquish your anger and listen to what I say.' I will mediate a 
pact between the trees and you. The trees have produced an extremely pretty 
girl named Marisha. Her creation has been meant only for the continuation of 
your progeny. She will produce Daksha Prajapati who will be as radiant as the 
fire and cause much increase in your progeny further. 
In the ancient times, a great savant of Vedas, sage Kandu was observing 
penance at the bank of river Gomti. Frightened by his penance Indra sent an 
apsara Prabhalocha to create a disturbance. 
That elf successfully created a disturbance in the penance of Kandu who then 
began to live with her in a cave. Kandu passed one hundred years enjoying 
sensual pleasures with the apsara. One day, the apsara expressed her desire 
to leave for her heavenly abode. This came as a shock for the sage Kandu. He 
requested her to stay for some more time with him. The apsara agreed to his 
request and stayed with him for another hundred years. Then once again she 
expressed her desire to leave for her heavenly abode.  
Once again, blinded by lust, the sage requested her to stay for some more 
time.  
Once again the apsara stayed for another hundred years with Kandu. 
Thus, every time, when the apsara got ready to leave, sage stopped her. The 
apsara knew about the agony of separation that a person experiences who is 

142 
 



blinded by lust. She also feared the curse that such a person might pour down 
out of agony. Thus she herself did not desert the sage and their love kept on 
increasing like a new moon. One day, towards the evening, the sage hurriedly 
left his hut. Amazingly Prabhalocha enquired about the reasons why he was 
going out in such a hurry. The sage replied that as it was dusk, he should offer 
his evening prayers. The sage's reply amazed the apsara further. Laughingly, 
she said- "O knower of religion, your day has ended after hundreds of years! 
Who will not be surprised to learn that your day ends after hundreds of 
years." The sage said- "You had arrived at the river bank right in the morning 
today. You passed the whole day with me and now it is evening. Why do you 
laugh at me then? Prabhalocha said- "O Brahmin! Hundreds of years have 
passed since I had arrived at your hut." Perplexed sage asked her- "Tell me 
exactly how much time has passed in our present communion? Prabhalocha 
told the sage that they had together passed nine hundred and seven years six 
months and three days. 
Hearing this, the sage began to curse himself that he was so sunk in the carnal 
pleasure with the apsara that he even forgot the time. He also began to fret 
that his whole penance had been brought to nought. Thus cursing himself, the 
sage also scolded the apsara and asked her to leave his hut at once. 
"The apsara was shivering in fear while her whole body was drenched in 
sweat. When she left the hermitage, she wiped her sweat with the leaves of 
the trees. While having carnal pleasure with the sage, Prabhalocha had 
conceived. Her foetus also oozed out in the form of sweat and was collected 
on the leaves. The wind brought the different parts of the foetus together 
while I nourished it with my rays. Thus the foetus grew safely and ultimately 
took birth as a girl child, Marisha. The trees will present you that same girl as 
your wife", said Soma. 
On the other hand after his penance was disturbed sage Kandu migrated to 
Purushaottam region (modern Jagannath-Puri) and began his penance afresh 
to please Lord Vishnu. 

143 
 



Tale of Marisha's previous birth Marisha, daughter of sage Kandu and 
Prabhalocha was a queen in her previous birth. She had lost her husband 
without having any child. She had then pleased Lord Vishnu with her devotion. 
The Lord had then asked her to seek a boon. She said- "O Lord! Having been 
widowed at a young age, I feel that my life has gone futile. I am very 
unfortunate. 
Hence O Lord! May I have by your grace, a virtuous husband like you and sons 
like Prajapati in my next birth. May I take birth not from the body of my 
mother. 
Lord Vishnu said- "All your wishes shall come true in your next birth. You will 
have ten prowessive and popular husbands. With their help, you will give birth 
to Prajapati whose progeny will populate all the three worlds. You will take 
birth not from your mother's body still you will be unmatched in beauty." 
Thus, coerced by Soma, Prachetas dropped their angry stance and accepted 
Marisha as their wife. From the parts of Prachetas, Marisha gave birth to 
Daksha Prajapati who had emerged from Brahma earlier. Following the dictate 
of Brahma, Daksha Prajapati produced different kinds of living beings as his 
children. First of all, he created womenfolk from his mind. He got ten of those 
women married to Dharma. Thirteen women were married to Kashyapa while 
twentyseven were married to Chandrama. All the Gods, demons, Nagas, cows, 
birds, Gandharvas, Apsaras, giants etc. are the progeny of those fifty women. 
Maitreya says- "O great sage! I want to hear the tale of origin of the Gods, the 
demons and all other creatures in detail." Parashar says- "Daksha created the 
sages, Gandharvas, demons, and serpents from his mind first. 
But none of those creatures could continue the progeny. So, with an intention 
of producing his progeny through carnal union, Daksha married Asikni, the 
daughter of another Prajapati. Daksha and Asikni together produced five 
thousand sons. All of those sons were eager to continue the process of 
reproduction when Devarshi Narada approached them and said- "O children! 
It appears from your action that all of you are eager to begin the process of 
reproduction right now. But before you do anything, kindly listen to what I 

144 
 



say. All of you are so ignorant that you do not know anything about the earth. 
How then will you carry out the reproduction? Look! You can move anywhere 
in the universe, so why don't you go and see the end of the earth?" Thus 
motivated by Narada, all the five thousand sons of Daksha dived into the sea 
and never returned thereafter like a river annihilates in the ocean. 
Daksha then married Vairuni and produced one thousand sons. They also 
intended to carry out reproduction but were misguided by Narada. They too 
followed the footsteps of their elder brothers. Learning about the fate of his 
sons, Daksha cursed Narada. Then Daksha and Vairuni gave birth to sixty 
daughters. Ten of them were married to Dharma, thirteen to Kashyapa, 
twenty-seven to Soma, four to Arishtnemi and two to Angira and Krishasva 
each. Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muhurta, 
Sadhya and Vishwa were the wives of Dharma. Vishwa gave birth to 
Vishwadeva, Sadhya to Sadhyagana; Marutvan was the son of Marutvati. Vasu 
gave birth to eight Vasus. Lamba gave birth to Ghosha, Yami to Nagveethi 
whereas Arundhati gave birth to all other creatures that dwell on earth. 
Sankalpa produced Sankalpa that is omnipresent resolution. 
Names of the eight Vasus were Ap, Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anil, Anal, 
Pratyush and Prabhas. 
Vaitand, Shrama, Shant and Dhvani were the sons of Ap. All annihilating Kal 
was the son of Dhruva. Varcha was the son of Soma. Dravin, Huta, Ityavar, 
Shishir, Pran and Varuna were the sons of Dharma. Manojav and Avigyatgati 
were the sons of Anil. Sharastamb, Shakh, Vishakh and Naigmeya were the 
sons of Anal. Pratyush had a son Deval. Vatstree the sister of Brihaspati was 
the wife of Prabhas. They had Vishwakarma as their son. Vishwakarma himself 
had four sons- Ajaikpad, Ahirbudhanya, Twashta, and Rudra. The great 
penancer Vishwaroop was the son of Twasta. 
O great sage! Har, Bahuroop, Treyambak, Aparajit, Vrishakapi, Shambhu, 
Kapardi, Raivat, Mrigvyadh, Sharpa and Kapali are the eleven Rudras. Sage 
Kashyapa had thirteen wives- Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Khasa, Surabhi, 
Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasha, Ira, Kadru and Muni. 

145 
 



Now listen to the description of their progenies. 
During the previous Manavantar, there were twelve Gods named Tushit. At 
the end of the Manavantar, they met together and said- "O brothers! Let us 
now enter the womb of Aditi and take birth as the Gods again in Vaivasvat 
Manavantar." Thus, Vishnu, Indra, Aryama, Dhata, Twashta, Pusha, Vivasvan, 
Savita, Maitra, Varuna, Anshu and Bhaga, these twelve sons of Aditi came to 
be known as Aditya. 
The twenty-seven wives of Soma gave birth to many talented sons. Wives of 
Arishtnemi gave birth to sixteen sons. Thus in all thirty-three Gods including 
eight Vasus, eleven Rudra, twelve Aditya, Prajapati and Vashatkar have been 
described in the Vedas. All of them are capable of taking birth at will. Just as 
the Sun rises and sets, similarly these Gods also appear in different yugas. 
From the part of Kashyapa, Diti gave birth to two invincible sons, 
Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksh and a daughter Sinhika who was married to 
Viprachiti. Hiranyakashipu had four sons- Anuhlad, Ahlad, Sahlad and 
Prahlada.  
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN  
TALE OF PRAHLADA AND NARSIMHA INCARNATION  
Parashar says- By the boon of Brahma, Hiranyakashipu had acquired 
tremendous power and came to control all the three worlds. He had driven 
the Gods out of heaven and used to receive the oblations offered to Surya, 
Vayu, Agni, Varuna, Chandrama, Kubera, Yamaraj etc. Because of his fear, all 
those Gods roamed on earth. 
All the creatures began to worship Hiranyakashipu. Beautiful and amorous 
elves danced in his palace while Gandharvas accompanied them on 
instruments. Prahlada was the youngest son of Hiranyakashipu. Like other 
children, he too was sent to Gurukula to be educated. One day, his teachers 
took Prahlada to Hiranyakashipu who was engaged in drinking of wine at that 
moment. 

146 
 



Lovingly he took his son into his lap and asked- "O son, tell me, what you have 
learnt so far in the auspices of your teachers?" Prahlada said- "O father! I 
salute to that Sri Hari who has no beginning, no end and no mid-part, who 
doesn't take birth and who is free from growth and decay." Hearing this, 
Hiranyakashipu looked at the teachers with bloodshot eyes and shouted at 
them- "O wretched Brahmins! In sheer violation of my orders, you have taught 
my son to praise my enemy." The teachers tried to express their apology 
saying that what Prahlada was saying was not taught by them. 
Hiranyakashipu asked then Prahlada who had taught him like that. Prahlada 
said- "O father! Lord Vishnu who resides in the heart of us all is the supreme 
creature. Who can teach anybody anything apart from Him?" Hiranyakashipu 
said- "O fool! Who is that Vishnu about whom you are describing before me, 
the Lord of entire world?" Prahlada replied- "Lord Vishnu is he who is 
contemplated about by the Yogis. He is the originator of the entire universe. 
His virtues cannot be described in words. That Parmeshwar is Vishnu." 
Hiranyakashipu said- "Fool! Who can be Parmeshwar other than me? Do you 
want to die that you are babbling like that?" Prahlada said- "O father! Your 
anger is baseless. Lord Vishnu is the creator of all of us including you and me. 
He controls our breaths." Infuriated Hiranyakashipu then ordered the teachers 
to take Prahlada away at once and wash his brain thoroughly. The teachers 
took Prahlada with them to their Gurukula. Prahlada began to concentrate in 
his studies. After many months, Hiranyakashipu once again called Prahlada to 
his palace and asked about his learning.  
Once again, Prahlada began to praise Lord Vishnu. This time, Hiranyakashipu 
ordered his assassination. He began to see his son as a threat to his throne. 
By the orders of Hiranyakashipu, many formidable demons attacked Prahlada 
with their weapons but Prahlada stood unfazed. He said- "O fools! Lord Vishnu 
is present in you, in me and even in your weapons. May your weapons have 
no effect on me." Indeed, the weapons of the demons could not even touch 
Prahlada. Hiranyakashipu said- "I can still pardon your life provided that you 
stop praising my opponent." Prahlada said- "O father! I fear nothing. By the 

147 
 



God's grace, I am free from the fear of birth and death." Hiranyakashipu then 
got Prahlada thrown amidst venomous snakes. But, biting by the snakes had 
no effect on Prahlada because his mind was contemplating in Lord 
Vishnu.Hiranyakashipu then got Prahlada trampled by big bull elephants. But 
even elephants could not harm Prahlada. Instead their tusks were broken as 
soon as they touched Prahlada. Even then Prahlada tried to pacify his father 
that it was Lord's strength that protected him every time. 
Prahlada's teachers who were the sons of Shukracharya then assured 
Hiranyakashipu that Prahlada was having a fickle mind because of his tender 
age. They also assured the demon king of transforming Prahlada and took him 
to their hermitage once again. 
Prahlada's Preaching-- But in the hermitage, Prahlada assembled other demon 
children and said- " Friends, listen to my preaching carefully and don't take it 
for granted because I have no personal interest in it. Every living being takes 
birth and suffers a lot while passing his life through childhood, youth and old 
age. The end result of life is nothing but death. It is one's Karma that 
accompany him birth after birth. But in every birth, this soul mistakes hunger, 
thirst, cold or hot for the pleasures. More of the luxuries one collects, more 
the sorrow increases. 
Attachment and passion are the greatest cause of sorrow. Even after passing a 
life that is full of sorrow, one suffers the agony of death and rebirth again. This 
whole cycle continues again and again. Lord Vishnu is the ultimate refuge for 
the soul, which feels drowned in the ocean of sorrow." Don't be confused with 
my young age. I am a boy like you. But the soul that stays within me is eternal. 
The soul has no distinct stages in life. But a human being is inflicted with lot of 
misconceptions. In the childhood, he prefers to play than contemplating on 
God. In the youth, lust and carnal pleasures attract the mind. Still a human 
being doesn't get serious about his benefit. He keeps on postponing his 
spiritual matters for his old age. But in old age, a human being has no option 
but to see his trembling fingers and repent about his past. Thus a human 
being spoils his whole life. A wise person hence must ignore the different 

148 
 



stages of his body's stay on earth and make efforts for his benefit right in his 
childhood. 
What I have told you is unchangeable fact. Start reciting Lord Vishnu's name 
for my pleasure atleast. His remembrance is enough to destroy all the sins. 
May your mind always contemplate on Him day and night. Thus all your 
miseries shall come to an end. 
 
CHAPTER TWELVE  
ATTEMPTS TO KILL PRAHLADA  
When the demons saw that their all efforts failed to faze Prahlada and that he 
was preaching the demon children they informed Hiranyakashipu about all 
these happenings. Hiranyakashipu at once called his cook and ordered him to 
poison Prahlada through food. But the poisonous food also could not hurt 
Prahlada. In fact, its poison was rendered ineffective by the recitation of 
Lord's name. This frightened the cook. He informed Hiranyakashipu about that 
miraculous event. 
Hiranyakashipu then ordered the priests who were Prahlada's teachers to 
invoke the ogress Kritya in order to kill Prahlada. The teachers tried to 
convince Prahlada before invoking Kritya. 
"O prince, you are the son of great Hiranyakashipu and have taken birth in 
Brahma's lineage. 
What have you to do with matters like God and all that? The whole world is 
dependent on your father. You should also take refuge of your father and stop 
praising his opponent. Father is revered and even greater than the teachers." 
Prahlada said-"O fortunate ones! I know the prowess of my father. I also do 
not doubt regarding my father's reverence and greatness. I will not commit 
any crime against him but kindly listen to me what I mean by the endless 
God.”  

149 
 



“O teachers! There are four attainable goals in one's life. You ask me what 
have I to do with He, who helps all the human beings to attain these four 
goals- Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. 
You are my teachers. You are free to say anything to me. But within me stays 
He who is the creator of all, who is the preserver of all and who is the 
destroyer of all of us. Kindly forgive me if I have committed any thing wrong in 
your honor." The teachers said-"O foolish boy, we saved you from imminent 
death thinking that you are our disciple and that you will not balderdash in 
future. But still you speak nonsense. Listen, if you don't drop your 
stubbornness we'll have to invoke Kritya the ogress in order to get you slain." 
Unfazed Prahlada said that life and death were immaterial for the soul that 
protects or destroys itself through auspicious and inauspicious deeds. Hence 
one should always strive to behave in an auspicious way. But Prahlada's words 
further enraged his teachers. They invoked the ogress Kritya to get Prahlada 
slain. Kritya hit Prahlada's chest hard with her trident. But as soon as the 
trident touched his chest it broke into pieces without harming Prahlada. 
Seeing her attempt failed, Kritya killed the teachers and disappeared. His 
teachers' death caused immense pain for Prahlada. Mourning for their death, 
he prayed Lord Vishnu to resurrect them. Hearing his prayers, Lord Vishnu 
once again granted life to his teachers. The teachers got up as if from a deep 
slumber. They realised their mistake and blessed Prahlada and resolved never 
to have hostility against him. Then they went to the palace and informed 
Hiranyakashipu about all the happenings. 
 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN  
LORD'S VIRTUES AND PROTECTION OF PRAHLADA  
Hearing the news of Kritya's failure to kill Prahlada, killing of teachers and 
their subsequent revival as effected by Prahlada, Hiranyakashipu called his son 
and asked if all those miracles were natural or he knew some magical tricks. 
Prahlada said- "O father, neither I know any magic nor is the miracle a part of 

150 
 



my nature. All these are ordinary things for he who has eternal God in his 
heart. No one can harm those who never wish ill for the others. All the living 
beings are equal for Him. In every creature, I see the same Lord Vishnu who is 
present within me; hence I never try to harm him or her. I cannot even think 
of harming anybody. It is this feeling that protects me from every physical, 
mental or divinely discomfort." But these words failed to please 
Hiranyakashipu. He ordered his men to throw Prahlada from a very high fort. 
Even this attempt, however failed to cause any harm to Prahlada for the 
mother earth took him in her lap tenderly in the midway. Suspecting some 
illusionary powers helping Prahlada, Hiranyakashipu ordered Shambarasur to 
kill him using his illusionary powers. 
Shambarasur created many illusions to kill Prahlada. But right then Lord 
Vishnu sent His Sudarshan Chakra to counter those demonic illusions and 
protect Prahlada. Sudarshan Chakra destroyed all the demonic illusions one by 
one. Then Hiranyakashipu ordered Vayu to dry up Prahlada to death. When 
Vayu entered Prahlada's body and began to dry him up, the Lord came to stay 
in his heart where God absorbed all the drying effects of the air thus rendering 
it weak. 
After all those attempts failed, Prahlada returned to his teachers' hermitage 
and resumed his education once again. The teachers trained him all the 
relevant subjects. Then they once again took Prahlada to his father and told 
him that now his education was over. Hiranyakashipu asked- "O son! How 
should one behave with the others? Tell me what have learned so far. I am 
eager to know your opinions." Prahlada said-"O father, indeed my teachers 
have taught me in different subjects. I have too learned them with heart. They 
taught me that diplomatic policies should be applied in order to train 
friendship. But excuse me father, I see no friend or no enemy, so in my 
opinion these policies are totally irrelevant. Tell me O father what is the use of 
means when there is nobody to be trained. Lord Vishnu is present 
everywhere. In you, in me and in all other creatures. Hence instead of using in 
sinisterly actions, one should use his wits for good and benefit of all.”  

151 
 



“O fortunate one, everybody longs for the throne and a big kingdom. But only 
those attain these things who really deserve and have them in their destiny. 
Even the most inert and imprudent people who are weak and know nothing 
about the policies get these things because of destiny. 
Hence all those who wish for splendour must strive to accumulate pious 
actions. Those who long for salvation must strive to acquire impartial view for 
all. Such actions please God and when He is pleased all the miseries are 
attenuated." Hearing these words, Hiranyakashipu kicked Prahlada hard and 
ordered his demons to tie him in Nagpash and throw into the sea. The demons 
obeyed their master and threw Prahlada into the sea after tying him in 
Nagpash. With Prahlada's motion great disturbances occurred in the sea, 
seeing that Hiranyakashipu ordered the demons to cover the sea with huge 
mountains so that Prahlada could not get a passage to escape. When the 
demons uprooted huge mountains and put them into the sea, Prahlada began 
to pray God with concentrated mind. 
 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN  
APPEARANCE OF LORD  
As soon as Prahlada began to pray the Lord, his Nagpash broke and the 
mountains that the demons had thrown into the sea also lightened up causing 
great relief for Prahlada. Lord Vishnu appeared before him and said- "O 
Prahlada! I am pleased with your devotion. You may seek any boon of your 
wish." Prahlada said- "May I always have an unconditional devotion for you. 
May your remembrance never be away from my heart." God said - " Your 
devotion for me shall always remain the same. Now, seek anything you wish." 
Prahlada said- "O Lord! My father has always cultivated hostility for you 
because of my devotion. May my father be free from the sin of his action." 
Lord said- "O Prahlada! All your wishes shall come true but still seek any boon 
of your choice." Prahlada said- "O Lord! I don't want anything other than 
devotion for you." Lord said -" O Prahlada! You have nothing in your mind but 

152 
 



devotion for me, so with my grace, you will attain supreme abode."Saying this, 
the Lord disappeared. In later course, ultimately Hiranyakashipu decided to 
kill Prahlada himself. He tied Prahlada to a pillar and shouting abusively for 
God, he hit the pillar. 
As soon as he hit the pillar, it broke and Lord appeared from it in Narsimha 
incarnation. His appearance was extremely formidable with half human and 
half lion form. Dragging Hiranyakashipu to the threshold, He killed him with 
his powerful talons. After the killing of his father, Prahlada took over the 
throne and ruled his subjects religiously. 
 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN  
LINEAGE OF KASHYAPA'S OTHER WIVES  
After the death of Hiranyakashipu, Prahlada continued his lineage. Prahlada 
had a son, Virochan. 
Virochan in his turn had Bali as his son. The prowessive Bali was sent to the 
nether world by Vamana incarnation of Lord. Bali had one hundred sons 
among whom Banasur was the eldest. 
Kashyapa's second wife Danu had sons like Dwimurdha, Shambar, Ayomuk, 
Shankushira, Kapila, Shankar, Ekchakra, Mahabahu, Tarak, Mahabal, 
Swarbhanu, Vrishparva, Pulom and Viprachiti. Swarbhanu had a daughter- 
Prabha whereas Sarmishtha, Updan, and Haishira were the daughters of 
Vrishparva. Vaishwanar had two daughters- Puloma and Kalka who were 
married to Kashyapa. From the part of Kashyapa, they gave birth to sixty 
thousand giants known as Paulom and Kalkeya. 
Kashyapa's another wife, Tamra gave birth to six daughters- Shuki, Shyeni, 
Bhasi, Sugreevi, Suchi and Griddhrika. Shuki gave birth to the birds like 
parrots, owls and crows. Shyeni gave birth to sleep while Bhasi produced light. 
Griddhrika gave birth to vultures whereas Suchi produced aquatic birds. 
Sugreevi gave birth to equine animals like horse, camels and asses. 

153 
 



Vinata, one of the wives of Kashyapa gave birth to Garuda and Arun. Garuda 
became the vehicle of Lord Vishnu while Arun became the charioteer of the 
Sun. Surasa gave birth to millions of the snakes. Kadru also had great snakes 
like Shesha, Vasuki, Takshak, Shankhshwet, Mahapadm, Kambal, Ashwatar, 
Ilaputra, Nag, Karkotak, Dhananjay etc. as her sons. Krodhavasha gave birth to 
anger and Devils. Surabhi gave birth to cows and buffaloes. Ira gave birth to 
the trees, creepers, and scores of grasses. Khasa gave birth to Yaksha and 
monsters. Muni produced elves whereas Arishta gave birth to Gandharvas. 
After the annihilation of her sons, Diti once again pleased Kashyapa and 
sought a son who could destroy even Indra. Kashyapa granted her boon but 
stipulated that she would have such a son only when she observes complete 
sanctity during one hundred years of gestation period. Diti agreed to abide by 
the stipulation. Then they copulated as a result of which Diti conceived. 
When Indra came to know that Diti had conceived a son who would be able to 
destroy even him he arrived at Kashyapa's hermitage and began to serve Diti 
with full devotion. He had in fact arrived there to see if by chance Diti ever 
violated the stipulation for then he would easily destroy the unborn child 
without incurring any sin. Sometime before the completion of gestation 
period, one day, Diti did violate the stipulation. She forgot to wash her feet 
after attending nature's call and retired on the bed. Indra was waiting for the 
moment. He at once entered Diti's womb carrying his mace in hand. There he 
broke the foetus into seven pieces but still the foetus survived and began to 
cry loudly. Indra then broke each of those seven pieces into seven pieces 
more and consoled them not to cry. Those forty-nine pieces of Diti's foetus 
later on came to be known as Marudgana the assistants of Indra. 
 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN  
THE DESCRIPTION OF UNIVERSAL ORDER  
When the great sages crowned Prithu as the king of the entire earth, Brahma 
had also divided the kingdoms. Thus, Brahma appointed Chandrama as the 

154 
 



ruler of all the Nakshatras, planets, Brahmins, vegetation, Yagya, penance etc. 
He also appointed Kubera as the ruler of the kings, Varuna as the ruler of the 
water bodies, Vishnu as the ruler of Adityas and Agni as the ruler of Vasus. 
Similarly, Daksha was appointed as the ruler of all the Prajapatis, Indra as the 
ruler of Marudgana and Prahlada was appointed as the ruler of the demons. 
Dharmaraj Yama became the ruler of Pitragana and Airavat became the ruler 
of all the elephants. Garuda came to rule the birds. Indra was appointed as 
king of the Gods, Uchchaisharva as the king of the horses, Vrishabh as the king 
of the cows. Lion became the king of the beasts, Sheshnag of the snakes, 
Himalaya became the king of all the landmasses, Kapila became the king of 
the sages and tiger became the king of those animals that have nails and long 
teeth. 
Thereafter, Brahma appointed Dikpals (guardians of the directions) on all 
corners of the earth. 
These Dikpals still guard the earth, which has seven continents and scores of 
big and small cities. 
All the Gods, demons, human beings, animals, birds, reptiles, in fact every 
living being have originated from the parts of omnipotent Lord Vishnu. Hence 
nobody but Lord Vishnu has the capacity to foster all the living beings on 
earth. That eternal God creates the world fosters it and ultimately destroys it. 
Thus, the Lord has four parts in the form of this entire creation. One of His 
parts remains unmanifested as Brahma. Second part appears like Prajapatis. 
Time is His third part whereas all the living beings constitute His fourth part. 
Since the beginning, during the existence and till the ultimate annihilation of 
the universe, the process of creation continued through Brahma, Prajapatis 
and all other living beings. In the beginning, Brahma creates the primitive 
living beings. Then the process of creation is taken over by Prajapatis. When 
their progenies populate the world, the process of creation continues 
spontaneously. Without Kal, no one including Brahma, Prajapatis and all the 
living beings can carry out the process of creation. Sri Hari is in the base of 

155 
 



every new creation that takes place through a pre-existing creation. The 
supreme abode of Lord Vishnu remains intangible. 
Sri Hari bears the intangible, pure and all pervasive spirit of the universe as 
Kaustubh Mani. He bears the intelligence as his mace. He bears the two kinds 
of ego in his conch and Sharang bow. 
Third kind of ego is present as the wheel in His hand. Vayjayanti garland that 
adorns His neck represents five senses and five physical elements. He bears 
the sense and motor organs as the arrows and the sword that He holds is 
knowledge. Thus, everything is dependent on Sri Hari. He is Himself intangible 
but for the benefit of human being, he bears all these things as ornaments. 
Even the counting of time is present in Him. God is present in all the seven 
worlds. He is the base of all the knowledge, our ancestor and the ancestors of 
our ancestors. He is present in the Gods, human beings, animals, all the Vedas, 
Ayurveda, Purana and other religious scriptures. All the visible and invisible 
things in the world have Lord Vishnu in them. Nothing is different from Him. 
Such a feeling in the mind keeps all the miseries and physical ailments away. 
PART TWO  
CHAPTER ONE DESCRIPTION OF PRIYAVRAT'S LINEAGE  
Maitreya says- "O sage! Now I wish to hear the description of the lineage of 
Priyavrata who was the son of Swayambhu Manu." Parashar says- Priyavrata 
was married to the daughter of sage Kardam. They had two daughters and ten 
sons. Three of his sons- Medha, Agnibahu and Putra knew everything about 
their previous births. Hence, they did not take any interest in royal luxuries. 
The remaining seven sons received the domain of seven parts of the earth 
from their father Priyavrata who then had taken to penance at a greatly 
sacred place named Shalgram. 
Among the eight Vasus, one was Hima. Merudevi was his wife. They had a son 
Rishabh. 
Rishabh had one hundred sons among which Bharata was the eldest. When he 
grew old, Rishabh transferred the onus of his kingdom on his eldest son 

156 
 



Bharata and himself took to penance in the forest. Since then, this landmass 
that stretches from the snowy peaks of Himalayas to the splashing Indian 
Ocean is known as Bharatavarsha. Bharata had a religious minded son Sumati. 
Indradyumna was the son of Sumati. Indradyumna's son was Parmeshthi. 
After him, the lineage of Priyavrata continued as follows- Pratihar, Pratiharta, 
Bhava, Udgeeth, Prastav, Prithu, Naka, Gaya, Nar, Virat, Mahavirya, Dheeman, 
Mahant, Manasyu, Twasta, Viraj, Raj, Shatajit. Shatajit had one hundred sons 
whose descendants populated the earth. They divided Bharatavarsha into 
nine parts. 
 
CHAPTER TWO  
GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION  
The earth has seven great islands- Jambu, Plaksha, Shalmali, Kusha, Kronch, 
Shakh and Pushkar. These are surrounded by oceans having saline water, 
sugarcane juice, wine, ghee, curd, milk and sweet water respectively. 
Jambudweep is situated at the center. Situated at the center of Jambudweep 
is golden Sumeru Mountain (Himalayas), which is eighty-four thousand Yojans 
high. Towards the south of Sumeru are Himavan, Hemkut and Nishad 
Mountains. Towards its north are Neel and Sringi Mountains. All these 
mountains are two thousand Yojans high with similar expansion. 
Towards the south of Sumeru Mountain, Bharatavarsha is the first landmass 
followed by KimPurushavarsha and Harivarsha. In the north of Sumeru 
Mountain, Ramayak is the first landmass followed by Hiranyamay and 
Uttarkuruvarsha. All these landmasses have expansion of nine thousand 
Yojans. At the center of these landmasses is Ilavritvarsha that bears Sumeru 
Mountain. On the four sides of Sumeru Mountain are four smaller mountains 
that seem to support the massive Sumeru. Among these four mountains, 
Mandrachal Mountain is in the east and in the south is Gandhmadan. Vipul is 
in the west and Suparsh is in the north. All these four mountains are ten 
thousand Yojans high and have lofty trees of Cadamba, Jambu, Pipal and 

157 
 



Banyan. Because of abundance of Jambu trees, this island came to be known 
as Jambudweep. It bears big fruits, which scatter all around upon falling on 
the earth. Their juice gives rise to the river Jambu. It is said that its water is 
capable of keeping demerits like sweat, foul smell, old age and loss of senses 
away from the drinker. When the juice of this fruit dries, it leaves the soil 
golden in colour. 
Towards the east of Sumeru Mountain is Bhadrashvavarsha and towards the 
west is Ketumalvarsha. Midway between the two is Ilavritvarsha. On the 
eastern side of Meru Mountain is the forest of Chaitrarath. In the south is 
Gandhmadan and in the west is Vaibhraj and towards the north is the forest 
named Nandan. Mount Sumeru also holds four holy lakes named Arunodaya, 
Mahabhadra, Asitoda and Manas. 
Shitambh, Kumund, Kukri, Malyavan, Vaikank are some of the peaks situated 
towards the eastern side of Sumeru. Towards the southern side are the peaks 
of Trikut, Shishir, Patang, Ruchak and Nishad. In the west are situated peaks of 
Shikhivasa, Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandhmadan and Jarudhi and in the north are 
situated the peaks of Shankhkoot, Rishabh, Hans, Nag and Kalanj. 
Above the mount Meru is situated Brahmapuri of Brahma which has an 
expansion of 14,000 Yojans. The Ganges that rises from the feet of Lord 
Vishnu circles the lunar sphere before falling in Brahmapuri. Thence it divides 
into four rivers- Sita, Chakshu, Alaknanda and Bhadra that flow into four 
directions. 
The landmasses of Bharata, Ketumal, Bhadrashva and Kuru appear like lotus 
leaf in shape. 
Among all the peaks that surround Mount Meru are present beautiful caves. 
There also exist beautiful towns and gardens. In these towns are situated 
beautiful temples of Lakshmi, Vishnu, Agni and Surya. Ravines of these 
mountains are populated by Gandharvas, Rakshasa, Yaksha and Danavas. 
Besides them, scores of religious people also live there. 

158 
 



Lord Vishnu stays as Hayagreev (human figure with horse head) form in 
Bhadrashvavarsha. In Ketumalvarsha, He is in boar form and in Bharatavarsha; 
He stays in turtle form. In Kuruvarsha, Lord Vishnu stays as fish. Thus Lord 
Vishnu is present everywhere. People of these eight landmasses are free from 
all kinds of sorrow, pain, emotions, hunger etc. and lead a healthy and rich life 
that extends up to ten or twelve thousand years. All these landmasses have 
seven indigenous mountains each from which hundreds of rivers rise. 
 
CHAPTER THREE  
DIVISION OF BHARATA AND OTHER LANDMASSES  
The landmass that is present between Himalayas and the ocean is known as 
Bharata. It has an expansion of 9,000 Yojans. It is populated by the 
descendants of Bharata. It has seven native mountains- Mahendra, Malay, 
Sahaya, Shuktiman, Riksha, Vindhya and Pariyatra. Bharatavarsha has nine 
divisions named Indradweep, Kaseru, Tamraparn, Gamastiman, Nagdweep, 
Soumya, Gandharva, Varun and Yahadweep which is surrounded by the sea 
and has an expansion of 1000 Yojans. In the eastern part of Bharata, live Kirat 
whereas in the western part live Yavans. In the mid part of Bharata, live 
population of Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras who pass their lives 
engage in works ascribed to their respective class. 
Rivers in India- From the Himalayas rise Shatudri (Sutlej) and Chandrabhaga 
rivers. From Pariyatra Mountain rise Veda and Smriti rivers. Narmada and 
Surasa rivers rise from Vindyachal. Tapi, Payoshani and Nirvindhya rivers rise 
from Riksha Mountain. Godavari, Bheemrati and Krishnaveli rivers rise from 
Sahaya Mountains. Kritmala and Tamraparni rivers rise from Malayachal. 
Trisama and Aryakulya rivers rise from Mahendragiri. Rishikulya and Kumari 
rivers rise from Shuktiman Mountain. All these rivers have scores of other 
branches and tributaries. 
Four yugas namely Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga and Kali Yuga 
descend on Bharatavarsha. In Bharatavarsha, sages observe penance to attain 

159 
 



better life in another world, people organise Yagyas and offer donations to the 
Brahmins respectfully. In Jambudweep, Lord Vishnu is worshipped in Yagyas. 
Bharatavarsha is the land par excellence in Jambudweep for it is a land of 
action. Soul passes through millions of births, only then it finds a chance to 
take birth in Bharatavarsha when its pious deeds accumulate to a certain 
extent. Even the Gods envy those people who take birth in Bharatavarsha. 
People in Bharatavarsha act without a desire to get fruits from their action. 
They dedicate their whole action to Lord Vishnu and ultimately mingle with 
Him. 
 
CHAPTER FOUR  
DESCRIPTION OF OTHER DWEEPS  
Plakshdweep- Plakshdweep has an expansion of 2,00,000 Yojans. Its ruler 
Meghatithi had seven sons- Shanthaya, Shishir, Sukhodaya, Anand, Shiva, 
Kshemak and Dhruva. Those seven princes later on came to rule Plakshdweep. 
Hence, Plakshdweep had seven divisions named after these seven princes. 
Seven mountains mark the boundaries of Plakshdweep. These are Gomed, 
Chandra, Narada, Dundubhi, Sobhak, Sumana and Vaibhraj. People of 
Plakshdweep live long and pleasant life. Seven rivers namely Anutapta, Shikhi, 
Vipasha, Tridiva, Aklama, Amrita and Sukrita flow in Plakshdweep. In all the 
islands from Plakshdweep to Shakhdweep, only Treta Yuga stays. Plaksh tree 
(Pakad) abound in Plakshdweep. Lord Vishnu is worshipped there as Soma. 
Shalmaldweep- Vayushman was the ruler of Shalmaldweep. He too had seven 
sons- Shwet, Harit, Jibhoot, Rohit, Vaidyut, Manas and Suprabh. Hence 
Shalmaldweep was also divided into seven divisions named after these 
princes. A sea of sugarcane juice surrounds this island. 
Shalmaldweep has seven mountains which are the source of all the 
gemstones. Seven rivers flow in Shalmaldweep. These rivers contain 
innumerable kinds of medicinal herbs. Lord Vishnu is worshipped there in 
Vayu form. Because of the abundance of Semul (silk cotton) trees, this island 

160 
 



came to be known as Shalmaldweep. A sea of wine surrounds this island. 
Kushdweep- The ruler of Kushdweep, Jyotishman had seven sons. Their names 
were Venuman, Vairath, Lamban, Ghriti, Prabhakar and Kapila. The divisions 
of this island were named after them. This island too has seven mountains and 
seven rivers. 
Lord Vishnu is worshipped here in Janardan form. Because of abundance of 
Kusha grass, this island is known as Kushdweep. A sea of ghee surrounds this 
island. 
Kraunchdweep- The ruler of Kraunchdweep, Dyutiman had seven sons named 
Kushal, Mandak, Ushna, Peevar, Andhkarak, Muni and Dudhumbi. Hence the 
seven divisions of this island were named after these princes. This island too 
has seven mountains and seven main rivers with hundreds of small rivers and 
tributaries. Lord Vishnu is worshipped here in Rudra form through Yagyas. A 
sea of whey surrounds this island. 
Shakhdweep- The ruler of Shakhdweep Bhavya, also had seven sons named 
Jalad, Kumar, Sukumar, Marichak, Kutumod, Maudaki and Mahadrum. Hence 
the seven divisions of this island were named after these princes; this island 
too has seven mountains and seven holy rivers. Lord Vishnu is worshipped 
here in Surya form. Because of an abundance of Shakh trees, this island got its 
name. A sea of milk surrounds this island. 
Pushkardweep- This is the largest among all the seven islands. Its ruler Savan 
had two sonsMahavir and Dhataki. Hence, this island has two divisions- 
Mahavirkhand and Dhatakikhand. A huge mountain named Mansotra is 
situated at the center of this great island. Brahma stays on a huge Banyan tree 
in this island. A sea of sweet water surrounds this island. 
 
CHAPTER FIVE  
DESCRIPTION OF NETHER WORLDS  
Earth's total height is 70,000 Yojans. In her depth, are situated seven nether 
worlds with a depth of 10,000 Yojans each respectively. Names of these seven 

161 
 



nether worlds are Atal, Vital, Nital, Gamastiman, Mahatal, Sutal and Patal. 
These nether worlds have beautiful palaces, and have lands which are white, 
black, red and yellow in colour with gravel, rocky and golden soil. Scores of 
races including Danav, Daitya, Yaksha and Nagas live there. 
Once upon a time, Narada visited these nether worlds. When he returned to 
heaven, he told the people there that the nether world was more beautiful 
than heaven. He told them that ornaments of the Nagas contained precious 
gemstones and the womenfolk of Daitya and Danavas were an attraction even 
for the Gods. The sun was illuminating in the nether worlds but not scorching. 
Similarly, the Moon only shone there but did not cause bitter cold. 
Beneath the nether worlds is situated an idolised form of Lord Vishnu. It is 
known as Shesh. 
Even the demons and giants cannot describe His virtues. He has thousands of 
hoods each carrying a bright gemstone that illuminates the azimuths. In His 
presence, the demons lose their strength. His eyes are red and He wears an 
earring, crown, garland and blue length of cloth. 
Bearing the flow of Ganges, He stays like the Kailash Mountain. At the end of 
the Kalpa, poison emanates from His thousands of hoods and destroys all the 
three worlds taking the form of Rudra named Sankarshan. Nobody can find 
the ends of His virtues; hence He is known as Anant.  
CHAPTER SIX  
DESCRIPTION OF HELLS  
Beneath the earth and water are situated the hells into which, the sinners are 
thrown. Raurav, Sukar, Rodha, Tal, Vishsan, Mahajwal, Taptakumbh, Lavan, 
Vilohit, Rudhiramabh, Vaitarni, Krimish, Krimibhojan, Asipatravana, Krishna, 
Lalabhaksha, Darun, Puyuvah, Pap, Vahnijwal, Adhahshira, Sandansh, Kalsutra, 
Tamas, Avichi, Swabhojan, Apratishthit and Aprachi are the main hells. These 
are all under the domain of Yamaraj. 

162 
 



Those who give false witness are thrown into Raurav hell. Those who kill 
unborn babies and cows or destroy the villages fall into Rodha hell. Those who 
drink wine, kill Brahmin or steal gold fall into Sukar hell. Those who kill 
Kshatriya or Vaishya fall into Tal hell. Those who copulate with teacher's wife 
or their own sister fall in Taptakumbh hell. Those who sell women and horses 
fall in Taptloha hell. Those who copulate with their daughter or daughter-in-
law fall into Mahajwal hell. Those who criticise the teachers and the Vedas or 
sell Vedas fall into Lavan hell. Those who violate social norms fall in Vilohit hell 
and those who envy the Gods, the Brahmins and their parents fall in 
Krimibhaksha hell. 
Those who dine first even before the parents, the Gods and the guests fall into 
Lalabhaksha hell. 
Those who manufacture arrows fall in Vedhak hell. Those who manufacture 
swords fall in Vishsan hell. Backbiters, killers of friends and sellers of wine fall 
in Rudhirandh hell. Destroyers of Yagya and villages fall in Vaitarni hell. 
Thus, the sinners have to suffer scores of tortures in these and many other 
hells. These sinners after passing their lives in the hell take birth as worms, 
aquatic animals and birds, terrestrial animals, human beings, religious people 
etc. Only those sinners who do not expiate for their sins fall into the hell. Our 
sages have made provisions of expiation for those sinners who feel guilty in 
their conscience after committing their sins. Remembrance of Lord's name is 
in itself the greatest expiation. Remembrance of Lord's name anytime in life 
destroys all the previous sins instantaneously. Hence recitation of Vasudeva's 
name is sure way of attaining salvation. Thus those who recite and remember 
Lord Vishnu's name never fall in any hell because their sins have been 
destroyed. Anything where one feels pleasant is heaven and opposite of it is 
hell. 
 
CHAPTER SEVEN  
DESCRIPTION OF CELESTIAL WORLDS  

163 
 



Maitreya says- "O Brahmin! Kindly narrate now about the celestial worlds and 
the position of stars and planets there." Parashar says- At a height of 1,00,000 
Yojans above the earth is the sphere of the Sun. 1,00,000 Yojans above it is 
the sphere of the Moon and 1,00,000 Yojans above it is the sphere of the 
stars. 
At a height of 2,00,000 Yojans above, the sphere of stars is Buddh (Mercury) 
and 2,00,000 Yojans above it is Shukra (Venus). Above Venus are Mangal 
(Mars), Brihaspati (Jupiter), and Shani (Saturn) at respective heights of 
2,00,000 Yojans each. 1,00,000 Yojans above the Saturn is SaptaRishi and 
1,00,000 Yojans above it is the sphere of Dhruva. It appears as the center of a 
bright ring. 
One crore Yojans above Dhruva is Maharloka where sages like Bhrigu etc. live. 
Two crore Yojans above Maharloka is Janaloka where Brahma's sons Sanakadi 
Kumars live. At a height of 8,00,00,000 Yojans above Janaloka is Tapaloka live 
deities named Vairaj who are never consigned to flames. Twelve crore Yojans 
above Tapaloka is Satyaloka which is also known as Brahmaloka. Only 
immortal beings live there. 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT  
ORDER OF THE SUN, STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 
The Sun travels speedily across the sky like an arrow. He determines the night 
and the day. With the rising and setting of the Sun, one can have knowledge 
of the directions. Sun lights up all the places in the entire world except 
Brahmaloka. Sun's rays that reach Brahmaloka return back rendered 
ineffective by the radiance of Brahma. Since Mount Sumeru is situated at the 
north of all the islands and Varsh, hence towards the northern side of it, one 
part of land experiences the day while another part experiences the night all 
the time. The radiant Sun setting merges with fire. Hence, fire also has the 
power of illuminating and warming its environment. 

164 
 



At the beginning of Uttarayan (northward motion of the Sun), the Sun enters 
the zodiac of Capricorn. Travelling through Aquarius and Pisces, it reaches the 
equator which is at the center of the earth. Thereafter the nights begin to 
decrease in comparison of the days. Then travelling through Aries, Taurus and 
Gemini, the Sun enters Cancer to begin its southward journey. 
The period of time between the day and night is dusk twilight. At that time, 
formidable demons try to swallow the Sun. Thus they have fierce battle with 
the Sun. The recitation of hymns by learned Brahmins during dusk twilight 
helps the Sun regain his lost radiance. With his brilliance then the demons are 
destroyed. Thus the Sun is a perfect form of Lord Vishnu. It shines with its 
inner radiance. Omkar is a symbolisation of the Sun. It is also mandatory for 
the Brahmins to perform evening worship. Those who do not worship in the 
evening hurt the Sun. 
Towards the north of SaptaRishi constellation, where polestar is situated, 
there is an abode of Lord Vishnu. Only those sages can reach there who are 
free from faults and whose sins and pious deeds have been attenuated. 
Supremely brilliant Dhruva stays in the abode of Vishnu. Every other thing is 
dependent upon Dhruva. All the Nakshatras also depend on Dhruva. On 
Nakshatras depend the clouds and on the clouds depends the rain and on the 
rains depend the nourishment of entire world. Thus, all the other things come 
to depend upon Dhruva. 
The sacred Ganges which is the destroyer of every sin also rises from the 
abode of Lord Vishnu. 
Dhruva bears the Ganges on his head. Flowing through the sphere of the 
Moon, the Ganges falls on Mount Meru and flows in every direction to 
sanctify the entire world. Bathing in the water of the Ganges destroys all the 
sins. Offering of oblations in the waters of Ganges satiates dead ancestors for 
one hundred years. Starry, chameleon-like appearance of Lord Vishnu can be 
seen in the night sky. A polestar is present in its tail. All the other stars, the 
Sun, the Moon and other planets are present on different parts of this 
chameleon and go round the polestar. Uttanpad's son Dhruva had pleased this 

165 
 



chameleon-like appearance of Lord Vishnu with his penance and sought a 
fixed position in His tail. Even the Sun is dependent on Dhruva. 
The Sun keeps on evaporating the water for eight months in a year. This 
evaporated water then rains for four months and nourishes the soil and 
produces different kinds of cereals for the nourishment of the entire world. 
The water that is evaporated by the Sun also nourishes the Moon. But the 
Moon itself does not consume that water. Instead it gives that water to the 
clouds. 
During winter season, this water released by the Moon falls on earth as snow 
and dew. 
The Sun draws water from Akashganga (the Milky Way) also and causes it to 
rain on earth at once. That water is so sacred that mere touch of it destroys all 
the sins. The rains that fall during Nakshatras like Kritika; Rohini, Addra etc. 
come from the water of Akashganga. 
 
CHAPTER NINE  
TWELVE NAMES OF THE SUN  
In the month of Chaitra, the Sun rides his chariot as Dhata. During that period, 
apsara Kratusthala, sage Pulastya, Nag Vasuki, Yaksha Rathmirith, demon Heti 
and the Gandharva Tumbaru are also present on the chariot as his assistants. 
In the month of Vaishakh, the Sun rides his chariot as Aryama with sage Pulah, 
Yaksha Rathauja, apsara Punjasthala, demon Praheti, snake Kachchhveer and 
Gandharva Narada as his assistants. 
In the month of Jyeshtha, the Sun is known as Mitra with sage Atri, snake 
Takshak, demon Paurusheya, apsara Menaka, Gandharva Haha and Yaksha 
Rathswan as his assistants. In the month of Ashad, the Sun rides his chariot as 
Varuna with sage Vashishta, snake Nag, apsara Sahajanya, Gandharva Huhu, 
demon Ratha and Yaksha Rathachitra as his assistants. 

166 
 



In the month of Shravan, the Sun is known as Indra with Gandharva 
Vishwabasu, Yaksha Strot, snake Elaputra, sage Angira, apsara Prabhalocha 
and the demon Sarpi as his assistants. In the month of Bhadrapad, the Sun is 
known as Vivasvan. With Gandharva Ugrasena, sage Bhrigu, Yaksha, Apurana, 
apsara Anubhlocha, snake Shankhpal and the demon Vyaghra as his assistants. 
In the month of Ashwin, the Sun is known as Pusha with Gandharva Vasuruchi, 
demon Vat, sage Gautam, snake Dhananjay, Yaksha Sushen and the apsara 
Ghritachi as his assistants. In the month of Kartik, the Sun is known as 
Parjanya and is assisted by the Gandharva Vishwabasu, sage Bharadwaj, snake 
Airavat, apsara Vishwashree, Yaksha Senjit and the demon Ap. 
In the month of Margsheersh, the Sun is known as Ansh and is assisted by 
sage Kashyapa, Yaksha Tarkshya, snake Mahapadma, apsara Urvashi, 
Gandharva Chitrasen and the demon Vidyut. In the month of Paush, the Sun is 
known as Bhaga and is assisted by sage Kratu, Gandharva Urnayu, demon 
Sfurja, snake Karkotak, Yaksha Arishtnemi and apsara Purvachitti. 
In the month of Magh, the Sun is known as Twasta with sage Jamadagni, 
snake Cambal, apsara Tilottama, demon Brahmopet, Yaksha Ritajit and 
Gandharva Dhritarashtra. In the month of Phagun, the Sun is known as Vishnu 
and is assisted by snake Ashwatar, apsara Rambha, Gandharva Suryavacha, 
Yaksha Shatajit, sage Vishwamitra and the demon Yagyopet. 
Thus having some parts of Lord Vishnu's radiance, these seven ganas stay in 
the sphere of the Sun for one month alternatively. They are also the cause of 
seasons like summer, winter and rain. 
 
CHAPTER TEN  
SURYA SHAKTI AND VAISHNAVI SHAKTI  
Maitreya says- "Lord, if only the seven Ganas are entrusted with the job of 
causing cold and summer, drought and rain, what is the purpose then of the 
Sun's existence? " Parashar says- It is true that Surya is one of the seven 
Ganas. Yet being the chief among them, it has special significance. 

167 
 



Omnipotent supreme power of Lord Vishnu is nothing but the three Vedas. 
These together stay within the Sun and provide it with energy necessary to 
sustain the world. Their presence within the Sun remains constant irrespective 
of the Sun's changing names every month. In the morning, Rigveda prays the 
Sun with its Shrutis. In the noontime, Yajurveda prays the Sun whereas in the 
evening, Shrutis of Samaveda pray the Sun. Thus, Lord Vishnu always 
energises the Sun. 
Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh are also present in trinity form. Their trinity too 
represents the three Vedas. At the beginning of creation, Brahma was in the 
form of Rigveda. During the sustenance of the universe, Lord Vishnu stays in 
Yajurveda form whereas at the end of the creation when Pralaya occurs, 
Rudra takes Samaveda form. Hence the recitation of Samaveda is considered 
inauspicious. Energies of the trinity stays within the Sun in synergetic form. 
Hence the Sun glows brilliantly and destroys the darkness. 
Lord Vishnu, who represents energy of this trinity, never rises nor sets. His 
Vaishnavi Shakti never parts with the Sun's chariot and stays there 
irrespective of the changing names of the Sun with months. Thus, the Sun, 
which causes the formation of day and night always satiates Pitragana, 
Devgana and human beings. One of the Sun's rays named Sushumna 
nourishes the Moon during its brighter phase. Then during the darker phase, 
the Gods drink the phases of the Moon, which are in fact, ambrosia 
accumulated during the brighter phase. When two days are left for the 
completion of darker phase, Pitragana drink the remaining two phases of the 
Moon. 
Thus, the Sun satiates the Gods and the deceased ancestors. 
The water that the Sun draws from earth is returned to the earth in the form 
of rains. This rainfall produces cereals, which nourish the entire population on 
earth. 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN  

168 
 



DESCRIPTION OF THE NINE PLANETS  
The Moon rides a chariot with three wheels. This chariot is hauled by ten 
horses. During its entire journey, the Moon passes through all the twenty-
seven Nakshatras. These horses haul the Moon's chariot for a complete Kalpa. 
With his rays, the Sun nourishes the Moon, which loses its strength because of 
drinking of its ambrosia by the Gods. 
When the Gods brought even the last drop of nectar from the Moon, it enters 
the Sun's sphere. 
That day is known as Amavasya (moonless night). That day, the Moon first 
enters the water then the foliage of the trees, creepers etc. and ultimately 
enters the Sun's sphere. That is why, anybody who cuts trees or even plucks a 
leaf commits crime equal to killing of Brahmin. On the day of Amavasya, 
Pitragana drink the nectar from the Moon and feel sated. Thus, Moon sates 
the Gods during the brighter phase and the Pitragana during darker phase. 
The Moon also showers its nectar on the trees, creepers and other vegetation. 
It also causes exhilaration for the human beings, animals, birds and creatures 
like insects etc. 
Buddha (Mercury) is the son of the Moon. His chariot is made of fire and air 
and is hauled by eight horses of deep yellow colour. The chariot of Shukra 
(Venus) is also very splendid and is adorned by beautiful flags. Mangal (Mars) 
rides a golden chariot, which is born from the fire. 
His chariot is hauled by eight red horses. Brihaspati rides a golden chariot 
hauled by eight yellow horses. Shani (Saturn) is famous for slow motion. He 
rides a chariot which was born from the sky. The colour of his chariot's horses 
is also very peculiar. Rahu's chariot is brown in colour and is hauled by eight 
black horses. Ketu's chariot is also drawn by eight horses, which are red in 
colour. 
Chariots of all the nine planets are tied to Dhruva. Thus, all of them traverse 
the same path again and again year after year. Sighting of Shishumar chakra 

169 
 



(constellation path) in the night destroys all the sins that a human being 
commits during the daytime. 
Water is a tangible form of Lord Vishnu. Even the earth was born out of water. 
Stars, all the three worlds, forests, vegetation, mountains, directions, rivers, 
sea and entire nature is the form of Lord Vishnu. This vivid nature thus shows 
omnipresence character of Lord Vishnu. 
 
CHAPTER TWELVE  
LIFE SKETCH OF BHARATA  
Maitreya says- "Lord! Now I wish to hear various tales from the life of King 
Bharata. He was born in a pious land and always contemplated on God. Even 
then why he failed to attain salvation? What did he do in his next birth as a 
Brahmin?" Parashar says- King Bharata always contemplated on God. He 
stayed at Shalgram for a long time. There he used to recite the names of God 
and collect various materials for His worship. 
Other than that, he did not do anything. One day while he was taking bath in 
the river, a doe arrived at the opposite bank. She was in the final stage of 
pregnancy. While she was drinking water, a lion roared somewhere in the 
forest behind her. That roar frightened the doe so much that she jumped 
across the river to save her life. Exertion of jumping resulted in premature 
littering of her fawn, which fell in the river. On the other hand, the doe also 
could not bear the pain and died. 
King Bharata rescued the just born fawn and brought it to his hermitage. Since 
then he began to foster the fawn with love and care. With time, Bharata's 
attachment grew for the fawn and whenever it went out of sight, he would 
feel perplexed. Soon King Bharata deserted everything for the love of the 
fawn. He even left his routine worship and meditation for it would be hard to 
concentrate whenever the fawn was near and at times when the fawn was out 
of sight, it worried Bharata and hence he could not concentrate. 

170 
 



But the fawn could not give up its natural instincts. When it grew up, one day, 
it happened to sight a herd of deer and mingled with it to find a mate of its 
own choice and since that day, it never returned to the hermitage. Separation 
from the deer proved fatal for the King Bharata. 
While dying his mind was fully concentrating on the thoughts of the deer 
which he had fostered with love and care. Because of it, Bharata took his next 
birth as a deer. But still he remembered his past life. So he deserted his herd 
and found a place in Shalgram where he passed his time eating dry grass and 
foliage. 
In his next birth, Bharata was born in a cultured Brahmin family. In this birth 
also, he remembered his past lives. Since birth, Bharata knew all the rituals 
and scriptures and saw his soul in a transcendental way. Hence, even after his 
thread ceremony, he did not take up his education. Even the teachers failed to 
incite his interest in education. Bharata roamed here and there, clad in rags 
and was hence insulted by fellow Brahmins and village folk. 
Thus Bharata remained indifferent to the others' treatment and sustained 
himself on whatever little he got to eat. After the demise of his father, his 
brothers made him work hard in the fields but gave little to eat. Because of his 
inertness, he was known as JadaBharata. 
One night, when JadaBharata was guarding his fields, the king's commander-
in-chief, Vrishatraj caught him and took him away. The king wanted to 
sacrifice him before Goddess Mahakali. But seeing the supreme Yogi being 
brought as a votive animal, Goddess Mahakali expressed her wrath by 
decapitating the king and drank his blood. 
In another incident later on, the king of Sauveer was travelling in a palanquin 
to visit sage Kapila for religious preaching. Incidentally, one man fell short to 
carry his palanquin, so the other carriers saw and caught JadaBharata to 
forcibly engage him in the work of carrying the palanquin. While walking, 
JadaBharata was taking care not to put his feet on any creature. So he was 
moving very slowly whereas other carriers were walking briskly. As a result of 

171 
 



it, the palanquin was moving jerkily causing irritation to the king. The king 
enquired the carriers about the reasons of that jerky motion. The carriers 
informed him that it was because of the new recruit who is moving very 
slowly. The king shouted at JadaBharata- "You appear to be quite burly. 
Don't you have enough strength? Does a little work tire you?" JadaBharata 
said- "O king! Neither I am burly nor carrying your palanquin. I am neither 
tired nor there is any need for me to labour." The king said- "Apparently you 
are burly and my palanquin is also resting on your shoulder. Carrying a load 
always tires anybody. How are you different then from the others?" 
JadaBharata said- "O king! First of all, tell me, what do you see directly? Your 
saying that I am carrying your palanquin is also meaningless. Now listen to 
what I say. Both my feet are resting on the earth. On the feet are thighs, and 
on the thighs is belly, on the belly are chest, shoulders and arms. Your 
palanquin is resting on the shoulders. What load am I carrying then? You are 
in the palanquin and I am on the earth are meaningless words. All the 
creatures, you and me are all carried by the five basic elements. Even our 
virtues are controlled by our action. Only action is born out of ignorance. The 
soul is pure, non-degradable, calm, intangible and beyond all nature. 
This same soul pervades all the creatures. It neither grows nor decays. Why 
did you say then that I am burly? If this palanquin that is resting on my 
shoulders-chest-belly-thighs and feet, could be a burden for me, it could also 
be a burden for you. Like this, all the living beings are carrying not only this 
palanquin but all the mountains, trees, houses and even the earth." Saying 
this, JadaBharata became silent, still carrying the palanquin. The king at once 
got down from the palanquin and fell at JadaBharata's feet and said- "O 
Brahmin! Leave this palanquin and tell me why have you taken this guise. Who 
are you? What is the reason of your coming here? I am eager to know about 
you." JadaBharata said- "I cannot tell what I am and for the reason why I came 
here, I can say only that coming and going are all done so that one can 
experience their result. The soul takes an incarnation only to experience the 
joy and sorrow as per its deeds. Why are you then enquiring specifically about 

172 
 



the reason for my coming here?" The king said- "The soul transmigrates from 
one body to another only because of its action. I want to hear from you 
preaching regarding 'who am I cannot be told'. O Brahmin! The soul that is 
eternal and experiences the results of its action is I. This mark of ego is not a 
cause of demerit in the soul." JadaBharata said- "You are right that words do 
not cause any demerit in the soul. But the ego expressed in the form of words 
is the reason for demerit in soul. When the same and single soul stays in 
everybody, possessive words are then meaningless. You are the king. This is 
the palanquin. They are the carriers and those are the subjects. O king! None 
of these words has any meaning. This palanquin is made of the wood received 
from some tree. So tell me what it should be called as- a palanquin or wood. 
Nobody says that the king is sitting on a tree. It is because of specific 
construction that a heap of wood has assumed the shape of a palanquin. For 
the purpose of action, the same soul is identified physically as a man, a 
woman, a cow, a goat, a horse, an elephant, a bird or a tree. But in fact, the 
soul is none of them. Things like wealth, king, kingdom, king's army and all 
other things that you possess are not fact. They are imaginations. 
For the subjects, you are king. For the son, you are father. For the wife, you 
are husband, and the father of her children. O king! Tell me, what should I 
address you as? Are you different from any of these nouns? Hence, always be 
careful while considering who am I? O king! The soul is so arranged in 
different roles that it is very difficult to tell specifically its real identity."  
CHAPTER THIRTEEN  
JADABHARATA PREACHES THE KING  
The king said-"O Brahmin. I was going to see sage Kapila and have the 
preaching regarding excellent human virtues. But now, hearing your words, I 
feel that I need not go any further. You are an ocean of knowledge. Kindly 
preach me about human virtues."JadaBharata said- "O king! For those who 
worship the Lord with a desire to receive wealth and kingdom, these things 
are a supreme goal. For those who want to attain heaven, action in the form 
of forming Yagya is the goal. But the supreme virtue is to act in a selfless way 

173 
 



without having a desire for results. A Yogi must contemplate on that 
transcendental soul because it is the only means to merge with that supreme 
soul." If the wealth is the goal while it is spent in religious activities. If the son 
is the goal, the father too might have been a goal for someone. Thus, there is 
no supreme goal because everything exists for a time then ceases to exist. 
Hence the assumption of any physical thing as a supreme goal is meaningless. 
And consideration of soul separate from supreme soul is also futile. The soul is 
one, all pervasive, impartial, pure, intangible and transcendental. It is free 
from the cycles of birth and death. It can neither be created nor be destroyed. 
It is supremely omniscient. Its manifestation in different life forms is 
temporary and identification of soul with living beings is baseless. Soul which 
is present in scores of living beings is basically single and same.  
Once one comes to know this, he doesn't remain in darkness. Veil of 
ignorance then parts with him. 
 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN  
TALE OF RIBHU AND NIDAGH  
Hearing JadaBharata's words, the king fell in deep thoughts. JadaBharata then 
narrated the tale of Ribhu and Nidagh.  
Once upon a time, in the beautiful town of Veernagar at the bank of the river 
Devika, there lived Nidagh, the son of Pulastya. He was a disciple of Ribhu, the 
son of Brahma. 
Once, after a gap of one thousand years, Ribhu decided to see his disciple 
Nidagh. So he arrived at Veernagar. Nidagh welcomed and treated him 
warmly. In the night after dinner, they both sat together and Nidagh asked 
him if he relished the food. 
Ribhu said- "O Brahmin! Only those who feel hungry are sated. I have never 
experienced hunger or thirst. How then can I tell you about my satisfaction? 
Hunger and thirst are the virtues of the physical body. Health and satisfaction 
are the states of mind. O Brahmin! Ask this question only to those who have 

174 
 



these virtues, not me. Even the qualities of food like deliciousness and 
insipidness are meaningless because a delicious edible item loses its taste 
after sometime and causes irritation instead of satisfaction. Hence you should 
strive to develop a sense of impartiality towards delicious and insipid food 
items. Also sense of impartiality is essential to attain salvation."  
CHAPTER FIFTEEN  
RIBHU PREACHES NIDAGH  
One thousand years after this incident, Ribhu once again decided to see his 
disciple Nidagh. So he once again arrived in Veernagar. At that time, king of 
that town was leading a procession of his army. So there was a great crowd on 
the main road of the town. Nidagh was carrying some worship materials from 
the forest but seeing a huge crowd on the road, he stood aside waiting for its 
dispersion. Meanwhile, Ribhu also arrived there. Seeing Nidagh standing alone 
away from the crowd, Ribhu approached him and asked why he was standing 
there. Nidagh said- "O Brahmin! Today, the king of our town had taken out a 
procession. So I am standing here waiting for the dispersion of crowd so that I 
can reach home and offer my worship."Ribhu asked- " It appears from your 
words that you know everything about your town. Kindly tell me who is the 
king and who are the subjects?" Nidagh said- "The one who is riding an 
elephant is the king and those who are following him on the ground are his 
subjects." Ribhu said- "O Nidagh! You have shown me the king and the 
elephant together but did not show their distinguishing symptoms separately. 
Who is the king among them and who is the elephant?" Nidagh said- "The one 
who is above is the king and the one who is beneath is the elephant." Ribhu 
said- "Kindly elaborate what is above and what is beneath?" As soon as Ribhu 
finished his words, Nidagh climbed on his shoulders and said- "Look, like the 
king, I am above you and like the elephant, you are beneath me." Ribhu said- 
"If you are like the king and I am like the elephant, kindly explain to me, who 
are you and who am I?" Nidagh at once climbed down and fell at Ribhu's feet 
and said- "Certainly, you are the great sage Ribhu." Ribhu said- "Yes, I am 
Ribhu and I have come to preach you out of affection." Thereafter Ribhu 

175 
 



preached Nidagh on the universality of soul and development of impartial 
view and left. By his preaching, Nidagh's ignorance dispersed and he began to 
see all the creatures equal to impartially. 
O king! Like the Brahmin who attains salvation because of impartial view, you 
also develop an impartial view regarding soul. Then you will not see anyone 
separate from you. Everything in this world is a manifestation of soul. 
Parashar says- "Thus preached by JadaBharata, the king of Sauveer left his 
partial attitude. 
JadaBharata too received salvation when he realised the true knowledge."  
 
PART THREE  
CHAPTER ONE  
DESCRIPTION OF MANVANTARAS  
Maitreya says- "O Gurudev! Now I wish to hear the description of all the 
Manvantaras and the Manus who ruled those Manvantaras." Parashar says- 
"First Manu was self-begotten. After him five more Manus occurred namely 
Swarochish, Uttam, Tamas, Raivat and Chakshush. All these Manus had 
occurred during the previous ages. The present Manu, Vaivasvat is the son of 
the Sun and this Manvantara is seventh." In the Swarochish Manvantara, 
Paravat and Tushitgana were the Gods. Vipaschit was Indra. 
Urjja, Stambh, Pran, Vat, Vrishabh, Nitya and Parivan were the SaptaRishis. 
Chaitra and KimPurusha etc. were the sons of Manu. 
Uttam was the Manu in Uttam Manvantara. Sushanti was Indra with Sudham, 
Satya, Japa, Pratardan and Vashvarti were his Ganas. Seven sons of Vashishta 
were SaptaRishis. 
In Tamas Manvantara, there were four categories of the Gods namely Supar, 
Hari, Satya and Sudhi. Each of them had twenty-seven Gods each. King Shibi 
was Indra during that Manvantara. 

176 
 



Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Katya, Chaitra, Agni, Vanak and Peevar were SaptaRishis. 
During Raivat Manvantara, Vibhu was Indra. There were four categories of the 
Gods namely Amitabh, Bhootrath, Vaikunth and Sumedha with fourteen Gods 
each. Hiranyaroma, Vedsri, Urdhvabahu, Vedbahu, Sudama, Parjanya and 
Mahamuni were the SaptaRishis. Four Manus Swarochish, Uttam, Tamas and 
Raivat are said to be the direct descendant of King Priyavrat. 
During Chakshush Manvantara, Indra's name was Manojav. Apya, Prasoot, 
Bhavya, Prithuk and Lekh were the categories of Gods each with eight deities. 
Sumedha, Viraja, Havishman, Uttam, Madhu, Atinama and Sahishnu were the 
SaptaRishis. 
During the present Manvantara, the Sun's brilliant son Shraddhdev is Manu. 
Aditya, Vasu and Rudra are the categories of the Gods. Indra's name is 
Puranadar. Vashishta, Kashyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautam, Vishwamitra and 
Bharadwaj are the SaptaRishis. Present Manu has nine sons Ikshvaku, Nrig, 
Drisht, Sharayati, Narishyant, Nabhag, Arisht, Karush and Prishadhra. 
 
CHAPTER TWO  
BIRTH OF SAVARANI MANU AND NEXT MANVANTARAS  
Maitreya says- "O sage, kindly narrate about the future Manvantaras that are 
to come." Parashar says- Vishwakarma's daughter Sangya was the wife of 
Surya. They had three children, Manu, Yama and Yamani. Sangya once felt 
unable to bear the radiance of Surya. So, appointing Chhaya (her shadow) in 
the service of Surya, she herself migrated to the forest and began to observe a 
penance. Surya mistook Chhaya for Sangya and copulated with her. This 
resulted in the birth of three children- one more Manu, Shani and Tapati. One 
day, getting angry for some unknown reason, Chhaya who was in the guise of 
Sangya cursed Yama. Only then Surya and Yama came to know about her real 
identity. Through meditation, Surya saw that the real Sangya was observing 
penance as a mare in the forest. Surya also arrived in the forest and mated 
with Sangya in horse form. Their mating resulted in the birth of two Ashwini 

177 
 



kumars, Retahstrav and Revant. Thereafter, Surya brought Sangya to his 
abode where Vishwakarma dulled his radiance. 
Chhaya's son, Manu was a sibling of Manu; hence he came to be known as 
Savarni. 
During the next Manvantara, Savarni will rule as Manu. Sutap, Amitabh and 
Mukhya will be the categories of Gods each with twenty deities. Ditiman, 
Galav, Rama, Krip, Ashwatthama, Rishisring and my son, Veda Vyasa will be 
among the SaptaRishis. By the grace of Lord Vishnu, Virochan's son Bali will 
occupy the throne of Indra. 
Daksha Savarni will be the ninth Manu. During that Manvantara, Par, 
Marichgarv and Sudharma will be the three categories of the Gods with 
twelve deities each. Adbhut will be Indra. Savan, Dyutiman, Bhavya, Vasu, 
Meghatithi, Jyotishman and Sata will be among the SaptaRishis. 
Brahma Savarni will be the tenth Manu. During that Manvantara, Sudhama 
and Vishuddh will be the two categories of Gods with hundred deities each. 
Shanti will be Indra. Havishman, Sukrit, Satya, Tapomurti, Nabhag, 
Apratimauja and Satyaketu will be among the SaptaRishis. Dharmasavarni will 
be the eleventh Manu. Vihangam, Kamgam and Nirvangati will be the 
categories of Gods each with thirty deities. Indra's name will be Vish. Nihsvar, 
Agniteja, Vayushman, Ghrini, Aruni, Havishman and Anagh will be among the 
SaptaRishis. 
Rudraputra Savarni will be the twelfth Manu. Ritudhama will be Indra and 
Harit, Rohit, Sumna, Sukarma and Surag will be the five categories of the Gods 
each with ten deities. Tapasvi, Sutapa, Tapomurti, Taporati, Tapoghriti, 
Tapodyuti and Tapodhan will be among the SaptaRishis. 
Ruchi will be the thirteenth Manu. Sutrama, Sukarma and Sudharma will be 
the categories of the Gods each with thirty-three deities. Devaspati will be 
Indra. Nirmoha, Tatvagarshi, Nishprakam, Nirutsuk, Ghritiman, Avyay and 
Sutapa will be among the SaptaRishis. 

178 
 



Bhaum will be the fourteenth Manu. Suchi will be Indra. Chakshush, Pavitra, 
Kanishth, Bhrajik and Vachavriddh will be the five categories of the Gods. 
Agnibahu, Suchi, Shukra, Magadh, Agnidhra, Yukt and Jit will be among the 
SaptaRishis. 
With the passing of these fourteen Manvantaras, a Kalpa that comprises of 
one thousand yugas will come to an end. In Satya Yuga, Lord Vishnu preaches 
about the metaphysical knowledge in Kapila's incarnation. In Treta Yuga, He 
destroys the evil doers and protects the world. In Dwapar Yuga, He divides the 
Vedas into four divisions. At the end of Kali Yuga, Lord takes Kali incarnation 
and inspires corrupt people to religious path. Thus, Lord Vishnu maintains 
order in all the four yugas and causes the creation, sustenance and ultimately 
destruction of the universe. 
 
CHAPTER THREE  
VEDA VYASA AND SIGNIFICANCE OF BRAHMAGYAN  
Maitreya says- "O Lord! How did God divide Vedas in the form of Veda Vyasa 
during different yugas?" Parashar says- During each Dwapar Yuga, in every 
Kalpa, Lord Vishnu takes incarnation as Veda Vyasa and effects the division of 
Vedas for the benefit of human beings. 
During every Dwapar Yuga of the present Vaivasvat Manvantara, different 
Vyasas have divided the Vedas twenty-eight times. During the first Dwapar, 
Brahma himself had divided the Vedas. 
During the second Dwapar, Prajapati was Veda Vyasa. During the third 
Dwapar, Shukracharya was Veda Vyasa. During fourth Dwapar, Brihaspati 
acted as Veda Vyasa. 
Description of other sages who acted as Veda Vyasa during the subsequent 
Dwapars is as follows- Surya- fifth Veda Vyasa; Mrityu- sixth Veda Vyasa, 
Indra- seventh Veda Vyasa, Vashishta- eighth Veda Vyasa, Saraswat- ninth 
Veda Vyasa, Tridhama- tenth Veda Vyasa, TRishikh- eleventh Veda Vyasa, 
Bharadwaj- twelfth Veda Vyasa, Antariksh- thirteenth Veda Vyasa, Varani- 

179 
 



fourteenth Veda Vyasa. Names of next fourteen Veda Vyasas are as 
followsTrayyarun, Dhananjay, Krutunjay, Jay, Bharadwaj, Gautam, Haryatma, 
Vajshrava, Trinbindhu, Riksh (Valmiki), Shakti, Parashar, Jatukarn and 
Krishnadwaipayan. After Krishnadwaipayan, Drona's son, Ashwatthama will be 
the next Veda Vyasa.  
CHAPTER FOUR  
EXPANSION OF THE BRANCHES OF RIGVEDA  
At the beginning of creation, Rigveda contained all the four Vedas with 
hundred thousand mantras. That Rigveda helped a lot in the propagation of 
ten kinds of Yagyas. Then during the twenty-eighth Dwapar, my son, 
Krishnadwaipayan effected the division of Rigveda in four Vedas. At the same 
time, he also trained four of his distinguished disciples in the study of Vedas. 
Each one of them was interested with the study of one particular Veda for 
infinite period of time. 
Accordingly, sage Pail mastered in Rigveda, Vaishampayan in Yajurveda, 
Jaimini in Samaveda and Sumantu in Atharvaveda. With the four Vedas, 
practice of Chaturhotra also came into being. 
Chaturhotra is now the main guiding feature of all kinds of Yagyas. Vyasa also 
established the Karmas of Adhvarayu by Yajurveda, of Hota by Rigveda, of 
Udgata by Samaveda and of Brahma by Atharvaveda. 
Sage Pail divided Rigveda into two divisions and taught them to two of his 
disciplesIndrapramiti and Vashkal. In his term, Vashkal divided his branch into 
four sub-branches and taught them to his disciples. Indrapramiti taught his 
branch of Rigveda to his talented son, sage Mandukeya. Thus branches and 
sub-branches of Rigveda grew substantially. In this tradition, 
Shakalyavedamitra learnt a Samhita and divided it into five sub-branches. One 
of his disciples named Shakpurn created three Samhitas whereas his another 
disciple created Nirukta Grantha. 
Vashkal created three Samhitas and taught them to Kalayani, Gargya and 
Tathaja. 

180 
 



 
CHAPTER FIVE  
DESCRIPTION OF THE BRANCHES OF YAJURVEDA  
A disciple of Veda Vyasa named Vaishampayan created twenty-seven 
branches of Yajurveda and taught them to his disciples. He had a disciple 
Yagyavalkya who was the son of Brahmarat. 
At that time, all the sages together constituted a rule that whoever did not 
join their group within seven days on Mahameru would be held as a sinner 
equal to killing a Brahmin. Only Vaishampayan had violated that ruling. The 
curse of the sages did come true when Vaishampayan killed his sleeping 
nephew accidentally. Then he asked his disciples to do away with his sin. 
Yagyavalkya said- "Lord! All these Brahmins are extremely dull. I will alone do 
away with your sin." These boastful words infuriated Vaishampayan. He said- 
"You are insulting these Brahmins so at once, regurgitate whatever I have 
taught you." Yagyavalkya said- "Lord! I uttered these words out of devotion 
for you. Still you wish me to regurgitate what you have taught me. Here it is! 
Saying this, Yagyavalkya vomited out all the Shrutis of Yajurveda. Other 
disciples of Vaishampayan pecked them in the form of partridges. Since then, 
they came to be known as Taitriya Brahmins. Holding his breath, Yagyavalkya 
then started the worship of the Sun with a desire to regain Yajurveda. 
Pleased by his prayers, Surya appeared before him in horse form and asked 
him to seek a boon. 
Yagyavalkya requested Surya to preach him those Shrutis of Yajurveda, which 
were not known even to his teacher, Vaishampayan. Surya preached him 
those Shrutis of Yajurveda, which were known as Ayatyam. The Brahmins who 
read these Shrutis came to be known as Vaji. Nowadays, there are fifteen sub-
branches of these Vaji Shrutis, which were initially expounded by sage 
Yagyavalkya. 
 

181 
 



CHAPTER SIX  
BRANCHES OF SAMAVEDA AND EIGHTEEN PURANAS 
Sage Jaimini, a disciple of Veda Vyasa, effected branches of Samaveda. Sage 
Jaimini had a son, Sumantu. Sumantu in turn had a son, Sukarma. Both of 
them studied a branch of Samaveda each. 
Sukarma divided his branch of Samaveda into sub-branches and taught them 
to his two disciplesKaushalya Hiranyanabh and Paushpinji. Hiranyanabh had 
five hundred disciples. Upon receiving the knowledge of Samaveda branch 
from Hiranyanabh, these disciples came to be known as Prachya Samag. 
Disciples of Paushpinji also effected divisions in Samaveda that they received 
from their teacher. One more disciple of Hiranyanabh named Kriti taught 
twenty-four Samhitas of Samaveda to his disciples. 
Sage Sumant taught Atharvaveda to his disciple Kabandh. Kabandh divided it 
into two parts and taught them to Devdarsh and Pathya respectively. A 
disciple of Pathya named Shaunak divided his Samhita into two parts and gave 
one of them to his disciple Vabhru and another to Saindhav. 
Saindhav's disciple Munjikesh divided his Samhita into three parts. Presently, 
five Samhitas of Atharvaveda namely Nakshatrakalpa, Vedakalpa, 
Samhitakalpa, Angiraskalpa and Shantikalpa are considered authentic. 
Still unsatisfied by his achievement, sage Veda Vyasa created Purana Samhita 
and taught them to his famous disciple Romaharshan Suta. The Samhita that 
was created by Romaharshan was the base of three Samhitas- Akritvrana, 
Savarni and Shanspayan created by Kashyapagotriya Brahmins. Vishnu Purana 
is in a way a summation of these four Samhitas. There are in all eighteen 
Puranas. In chronological order, these are as follows- Brahma Purana, Padma 
Purana, Vaishnav Purana, Shiva Purana, Bhagvat Purana. Narada Purana, 
Markandeya Purana, Agni Purana, Bhavishya Purana, Brahmavaivart Purana, 
Linga Purana, Varaha Purana, Skanda Purana, Vamana Purana, Kurma Purana, 
Matsya Purana, Garuda Purana and Brahmand Purana. 
 

182 
 



CHAPTER SEVEN  
YAMAGITA  
Maitreya says- "Lord! At the end of a life span, all the people come to be 
controlled by Yamaraj. 
When they are bound to undergo scores of suffering in different kinds of hells. 
Kindly narrate about such action by which a human being gets free from the 
noose of Yamaraj." Parashar says- Youngest among the Pandavas, Nakul had 
once put the same question before Pitamaha Bhisma. I am narrating what 
once Bhisma had narrated to Nakul. Before sending Yamaraj advises his 
agents to stay away from the devotee of Lord Krishna. 
Yamaraj is Lord of all the human beings except Vaishnavas. Only Lord Vishnu is 
able to control Yamaraj. About the devotee of Lord Vishnu, Yamaraj says - He 
who does not Deviate from his duties even in severest of crisis, who does not 
steal the wealth of others and kill animals is undoubtedly a devotee of Lord 
Vishnu. He who bears Lord Vishnu in his heart is a devotee of Lord Vishnu. He 
who is free from all kinds of ego and illusions and always wishes well for the 
others with pure and peaceful heart is a devotee of Lord Vishnu. Thus those 
who always contemplate on Lord Vishnu don't even fear death. Yama, 
Yamadoot, Yamapash, Yamagana and even tortures of Yama are unable to 
hurt them. 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT  
DUTIES OF FOUR CLASSES OF SOCIETY  
Maitreya says - "Lord! How should one worship Lord Vishnu? Kindly describe it 
to me. 
Parashar says- King Sagar had asked the same thing from sage Aurv. I am 
narrating what sage Aurv had preached him. 
Only those who fulfil their responsibilities and discharge their duties as per 
their class can worship Lord Vishnu. Those who shun activities like criticising 

183 
 



others, backbiting, womanising, stealing others' wealth and violence; those 
who do not torture others and are always ready to serve the Gods, Brahmins 
and teachers are able to please Lord Vishnu. Similarly, one should be always 
conscious regarding his duties as per his class. 
Accordingly, a Brahmin should carry out Yagyas, study scriptures and should 
not ever try to hurt anybody. A Kshatriya must organise Yagyas and study 
scriptures. He should also make donations to Brahmins and take weapons in 
order to protect the earth. A Vaishya must earn his livelihood through cattle 
rearing, commerce and agriculture. Besides he should also organise Yagyas 
make donations and study scriptures. A Shudra is expected to earn his 
livelihood through handicrafts. Saluting learned people is equal to organising 
Yagya for a Shudra. A Shudra may also make donations and oblations to 
appease his dead ancestors. 
In the time of emergency, a Brahmin may shift to the occupations meant for 
Kshatriya and Vaishya. A Kshatriya may take the occupation of a Vaishya 
during emergency but none of them should ever take to the occupation of 
Shudra. 
 
CHAPTER NINE  
DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERENT ASHRAMAS  
Since birth till death, human life passes through different stages. For the 
purpose of simplicity in following these stages, our sages have made 
provisions for four stages or ashramas in life namely Brahmacharya, 
Grihastha, Vanprastha and Sanyas. 
Upanayana Sanskara (thread ceremony) marks the beginning of education for 
the children born in Brahmin, Kshatriya and Vaishya classes. For this purpose, 
a disciple must stay in his teacher's hermitage and observe celibacy strictly. 
There, he must serve his teacher and worship Surya and Agni. The disciple is 
expected never to disobey his teacher. Activities should be according to the 
teacher's guidelines. He should also make arrangements for the daily worship 

184 
 



of his teacher in the way of collecting different materials like Havan samagri, 
water, Kusha, flowers etc. 
After the completion of education and paying all the dues, the disciple is ready 
to start second stage of his life that is Grihastha ashrama. For this he should 
first find a suitable girl from his class and make merry. During this stage, he 
should earn his livelihood by occupations ascribed for his class. He should 
please the Gods by Yagyas, his ancestors by oblations, Prajapatis by producing 
children, spectres by offering sacrifices of cereals and society by love. Even the 
ascetic and celibates depend on married people for their daily bread. Hence 
married life or Grihastha ashrama is stated to be excellent among all the 
ashramas. A Grihastha must welcome and warmly treat the guests who arrive 
unexpectedly. Such a household from where a guest returns desperately 
never succeeds in religious matters. All the worship and Yagyas offered in such 
a household go futile. Hence it is not proper for the householder to show ego 
and abuse a guest otherwise he will have to expiate for it later. 
A person must always be on alert to recognise the time when it is apt to take 
Vanprastha. When the children grow and begin to hold the responsibility of 
the household, one enters the third stage i.e. Vanprastha ashrama. So, leaving 
his wife in the shelter of his children or taking her with him, one should 
migrate to the forest and live a simple life sustaining on whatever little is 
available from the nature. This stage must be passed observing severe 
penance and restraining one's senses. Sanyas ashrama is the fourth stage of 
life. One should give up all activities related to Dharma, Artha and Kama in this 
stage. He should keep an impartial view for all and cultivate a feeling of love 
for all the creatures. He should not hurt anybody by his words, actions or even 
thoughts. He should not stay in a village or town for more than five days. He 
should sustain his life on alms. 
 
CHAPTER TEN  
CUSTOMS AND CONSECRATIONS  

185 
 



At the time of childbirth, it is the father's responsibility to carry out certain 
customs and consecrations for the child. First of all, Jatakarma Sanskara is 
carried out by which the newly born baby is included in the family. During this 
custom, a Brahmin couple is fed. It is also necessary for the couple that they 
should sit facing east while feeding. Thereafter, the parents should offer 
oblations to appease the Gods and dead ancestors. Lumps made of barley 
flour, curd and berries should be offered as oblations. Similar consecrations 
are carried out at the time of children's marriage. 
On the tenth day after the birth, the naming ceremony is carried out. Different 
castes and religion have different traditions regarding naming the newly born 
child. It is commonly seen that most of the children are named after the 
deities and Gods. Still one should see that the name should not be 
meaningless, abusive or inauspicious. Practice of selecting exceptionally long 
and difficult to pronounce names should also be avoided. 
The second stage in a child's life is when he or she begins education. In 
ancient times, thread ceremony used to be carried out and the children were 
sent to their teacher's hermitage for education. In modern age, thread 
ceremony is followed more or less in similar way as it used to be in the past. 
But children are not sent to Gurukul for education any more. After completing 
education, a person should get married and run his own life. In the past, there 
had been elaborate rituals for the selection of suitable bride. Elders of the 
house used to select a proper match for the boy. Their choice in most cases 
depended on many attributes and bodily features of the girl. But in modern 
age, with increased interaction among the people, it is not possible to follow 
each and every custom related to selection of bride. Still one should take care 
not to marry in his mother's lineage for up to fifth generation and in his 
father's lineage up to seventh generation. 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN  
DESCRIPTION OF RIGHTEOUSNESS  

186 
 



A married man knows the importance of following a righteous discourse. 
Married life is like a penance in which a couple gives birth and raises next 
generation. A married man is expected to get up early in the morning and 
contemplate on religious things. It helps him to follow righteous discourse. He 
is expected to attend nature's call in natural environment away from his 
house. Soil is considered the best means to wash hands. It should be followed 
by cleansing of the body. He should then offer oblations wearing fresh clothes 
to sages, deities and his dead ancestors. 
Offering oblations to the Sun, worship of tutelary God and other deities 
follows then. 
If the household is having some cattle, the head of the family should himself 
milk them and then wait for the guest. If and when a guest arrives, the head of 
the family must offer him a seat respectfully and treat him well with delicious 
food and pleasant talk. In Indian tradition, a guest is regarded equal to a deity. 
He should take food only after feeding the guest. Evening time has also 
elaborate rituals for a married man. First of all, after finishing daily chores, a 
married man must worship with peaceful mind. It is also good for his health to 
take food early in the evening and retire to a wooden bedstead. Night time is 
considered suitable period for enjoying carnal pleasure. Here too, a married 
man should enjoy intimacy with his wife only. 
 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
SANCTIFICATION AFTER BIRTH AND DEATH  
Life on earth is like an infinite ocean in which birth appears like a bubble and 
death marks the bursting of that bubble after which it exists no more. 
Atmosphere of a household is said to be defiled when a birth or death occurs 
in it. There are different sanctifying customs to be carried out on both these 
occasions. After the birth of a son, the father should offer oblations to please 
the Gods and his ancestors after taking a bath. 

187 
 



When a death occurs in a household, close relatives should take bath and 
carry the cadaver adorned with flowers and garlands outside the village or 
well-demarcated cremation ground for cremation. As per the religious 
tradition of the deceased, the body should either be consigned to the flames 
or buried. Then the relatives should again take bath in the pond or river facing 
south and offer watery oblations to the dead person. Since that day, Pindadan 
(offering sweet balls made of barley flour, sesame seeds, jaggery and honey) 
should be done for ten days. On the fourth day of the cremation, ashes should 
be collected for immersion in holy places of pilgrimage.The person who had 
carried out the cremation must abstain from intimacy for thirteen days. 
Outsiders are also barred from eating cereals from such a household where a 
death has occurred. 
For the different classes of Hindu society, this sanctifying period varies. For 
Brahmins, it is ten days, for Kshatriyas, it is twelve days, for Vaishyas, it is 
fifteen days and for Shudras, this period has been fixed for one month. On the 
same day in every subsequent month, oblations should be offered to the dead 
for one year. 
 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN  
DAYS FOR MONTHLY OBLATIONS  
A Shradha carried out with devotion pleases the entire world including human 
beings, Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Ashwini Kumars, Surya, Agni, Vasugana, 
Marudgana, Vishwadeva, Pitragana, birds, animals, reptiles, sages and of 
course the dead ancestors. Moonless and eighth day in the darker phase of 
every lunar month are considered the best days for offering oblations to the 
dead ancestors. 
Apart from these two, third day in the brighter phase of Vaishakh, ninth day in 
brighter phase of Kartik, thirteenth day in the darker phase of Bhadrapad and 
Amavasya of Magh are also considered excellent. During lunar and solar 
eclipses also, oblations should be made with water and sesame seeds. If 

188 
 



Shatabhisha Nakshatra occurs on Amavasya of Magh, it is considered an 
excellent conjugation for offering oblations to dead ancestors. Bathing in 
rivers like Ganga, Sutlej, Yamuna, Vipasha, Saraswati, Gomti, Godavari etc. 
while making oblations is also said to be extremely benefiting. It is not 
necessary also to show great pomp and show while making oblations. If one 
doesn't have enough money to offer oblations properly, he may simply pray 
the Sun saying that 'he is not fortunate enough to have wealth'. Thus, his 
ancestors would be pleased by his devotion alone. 
 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN  
METHOD FOR OBLATIONS 
 While making oblations to the dead ancestors, one should feed his near and 
dear ones as well as learned Brahmins who respect their parents. Intimacy 
with women is barred for those who have taken food in an oblation. Any guest 
who happens to arrive unexpectedly and uninvited should be treated well. 
Before feeding, plain cereals should be offered thrice to the fire reciting 
following hymns. AGNAYE KAVYA VAHANAYE SWAHA | SOMAY PITRAMATE 
SWAHA | VAIVASVATAY SWAHA || Remaining cereals then should be served 
with the food to the Brahmins and some parts should also be cast on earth 
and water should be offered on them. 
After the feast, the Brahmins should be seen off with respect. The host should 
then take food along with his family. Anger over enthusiasm and walking on 
the street is forbidden for the host during oblation period.  
 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN  
DO'S AND DON'TS DURING OBLATION  
Oblation with flesh of fish, rabbit, mongoose, hog, deer, gram flour and 
cereals cause extreme satisfaction for the ancestors. But in modern Kali Yuga, 
all types of flesh are forbidden in oblation rituals. Only cereals, milk, honey, 

189 
 



etc. are allowed. Offering of oblation in Gaya (a place of pilgrimage in Bihar) is 
said to save all the ancestors. Barley, wheat, rice, sesame seeds, peas, and 
mustard are the common cereals and grains used in oblations. 
Offering of oblation is a sacred affair. During the procedure, care should be 
taken that an eunuch, Chandala, sinner, imposter, patient, cock, dog, a naked 
person, monkey, pigs, a woman in menses, and anybody in whose house a 
death or birth has occurred don't see the performer otherwise neither the 
deities nor the ancestors would accept the oblations. Water used in oblation 
should also be free from odour and foam. Milk of camel, sheep, doe and 
buffalo should not be used in oblations. Before beginning the ritual, drive out 
the evil spirits from the selected piece of land. It should be cut off from 
outside influences through enclosures. 
 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN  
THE BATTLE OF GODS AND DEMONS  
Rig, Sama and Yajurveda are like the clothes of Hindu society. Those who give 
them up are in fact naked. This statement is endorsed by the following tale. 
Once upon a time, a battle occurred between the demons and the Gods. It 
lasted for one hundred years at the end of which period, the demons defeated 
the Gods. The humiliated Gods reached Ksheersagar and prayed Lord Vishnu. 
Pleased by their prayers, Lord Vishnu appeared before the Gods. All the Gods 
greeted Him and said- "O Lord! In sheer violation of Brahma's dictate, 
formidable demons have kidnapped even our due shares offered in the 
oblations. Protect us from the onslaught of the demons. We cannot fill them 
because they abide by their religion. Kindly show us a way to kill the demons." 
Hearing the pleas of the Gods, Lord Vishnu produced Mayamoha from His 
body and giving them to the Gods, said- "Mayamoha will cause illusion in the 
minds of the demons. The illusion will influence the demons to violate the 
path shown by the Vedas. You can kill them after that". 

190 
 



Saying this, the Lord disappeared. The Gods took Mayamoha and reached the 
abode of the demons. 
 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN  
DIALOGUE OF MAYAMOHA WITH DEMONS  
Mayamoha was produced in a naked form. It reached the bank of Narmada 
and saw the demons observing penance there. The naked Mayamoha then 
approached them and said in a sweet voice- " O demons! What is the purpose 
of your penance?" The demons said- "We are observing penance to achieve 
the metaphysical world." Mayamoha said- "If you long for salvation, do as I 
suggest. Follow the religion which is like an open gate to salvation." With such 
sweet talk, Mayamoha began to illumine the demons' mind. Mayamoha 
confused them further saying- "O demons, if you long for salvation or a place 
in the heaven, give up sacrificing animals and attain enlightenment. It is wrong 
notion to say that violence is the religious path. Offering of oblations in fire is 
also childish. Even an animal which eats green grass is better than Indra who is 
obliged to eat wood despite attaining that position after hundreds of great 
Yagyas. If an animal which is sacrificed in Yagya attains heaven, performer of 
Yagya would have killed his own father." Thus with these witty talks, 
Mayamoha Deviated the demons from the righteous path because of which 
they lost interest in Vedas.  
Once it was achieved, the Gods attacked the demons with full preparations. 
Ultimately, many demons were killed whereas those who remained came to 
be known as naked because they no longer followed the teachings of Vedas. 
Thus, anybody who does not practice the teachings of Vedas in his life is 
known as naked. Those who do not take to Vanprastha or Sanyas after the 
completion of Grihastha ashrama are naked. 
Tale of Shatadhanu- In the ancient times there was a king named Shatadhanu. 
His queen Shaivya was a righteous and religious woman. The king and the 
queen had worshipped Lord Vishnu observing severe penance. On the full 

191 
 



moon day in the month of Kartik when the king and queen came out of the 
Ganges after taking bath, they happened to sight an imposter Brahmin who 
was coming from the opposite direction. The Brahmin was a friend of the 
king's teacher. So, the king treated the Brahmin with respect. But his chaste 
wife did not show any respect for the imposter and kept silent all through the 
talk. She then had a sight of the Sun to expiate for the meeting with an 
imposter. On their return to the palace the king and the queen worshipped 
Lord Vishnu with proper rituals. 
In due course, the king died. The queen also committed Sati. Since the king 
had committed the sin of talking to an imposter during his penance the king 
had committed the sin of talking to an imposter during his penance, he took 
birth in a dog form whereas queen Shaivya took birth as the daughter of a 
Kashi king. She was extremely beautiful and knew everything about her 
previous birth. When her father decided to marry her off, she requestfully 
refused for she knew that her previous birth husband was roaming the streets 
and lanes of Vidisha in a dog form. 
The princess of Kashi then reached Vidisha and found out that dog was in fact 
King Shatadhanu. 
She fed the dog with delicious food eating which the dog began to wag its tail 
and show humility before the princess. The princess saluted the dog and 
narrated the whole thing to it that it was because of his sin of talking to an 
imposter during penance that he had to take birth as a dog. 
Thus, reminded by the princess, the dog contemplated for long on the events 
of his previous birth. He grew so sad that he gave up the dog form on the 
outskirts of the town. In his next birth however he was born as a jackal. Again 
the princess came to know that the jackal was King Shatadhanu and asked him 
whether he continued to talk to the imposter after their conversation in the 
previous birth? Only then, King Shatadhanu came to realise his mistake. He 
then observed fast till death. But in his next birth, he was born as a wolf. Again 
the princess reminded him of his previous birth. The king's became a vulture 
in his next birth. After that, he took birth in crow form and then as a peacock. 

192 
 



During that time, King Janaka was organising an Ashwamedha Yagya. In the 
yagya, the peacock was also given a ceremonial bath by the princess. During 
the bath, the princess reminded the peacock (King Shatadhanu) of his 
previous birth, the peacock too died and took next birth as the son of King 
Janaka. 
It was only after the birth of King Janaka's son that the princess told her father 
to organise a Swayamvara for her. In the Swayamvara, the prince also arrived. 
The princess accepted him respectfully as her husband. 
 
PART FOUR  
CHAPTER ONE  
DESCRIPTION OF VAIVASVAT MANU'S LINEAGE 
Lineage of Vaivasvat Manu finds its origin at Brahma. Brahma was the first to 
appear from Lord Vishnu who is the primitive cause for the whole creation. 
From the right hand thumb of Brahma, Daksha Prajapati appeared. Daksha 
produced Aditi and Aditi produced Vivasvan. Manu was the son of Vivasvan. 
Ikshvaku, Nrig, Grishth, Sharayati, Narishyant, Pranshu, Nabhag, Dishta, Karup 
and Prishadhra are the ten sons of Manu. 
With a desire for a son Manu organised a Yagya to please the deities Mitra 
and Varuna. But during the Yagya because of a wrong resolution of oblator, a 
daughter named Ila was born to them. But by the grace of Mitra-Varuna, she 
got masculine appearance and a name Sudyumna. In later course by the wrath 
of Lord Shiva, Sudyumna was converted into a woman. In woman form when 
Sudyumna was roaming near the hermitage of Buddha, the son of Chandrama, 
her beauty infatuated Buddha. As a result of their union, a son Pururava was 
born. Even after the birth of Pururava, Sudyumna could not give up his 
temptation to be a man again. Hence, learned sages organised a Yagya for 
Sudyumna and got him converted into a man again. In masculine form, 
Sudyumna produced three sons- Utkal, Gaya and Vinat. Manu had presented a 

193 
 



town named Prathishtha to Sudyumna, which he later on presented to 
Pururava. 
Pururava's progenies spread in all directions and acquired Kshatriya caste. 
Manu's son, Prishadhra became a Shudra because of killing a cow of his 
teacher. Manu's another son, Karush produced an exceptionally strong 
Kshatriya named Karush. Lineage of Dishta grew as followsNabhag, 
Balbandhan, Kirtiman, Vatsapreeti, Pranshu, Prajapati, Khanitra, Chakshush, 
Vimbha, Vivimbhak, Khaninetra, Ativibhuti, Karandham, Avikshit, Marut. 
Marut had a son, Narishyant. Lineage of Narishyant grew as follows- Dama, 
Rajvardhan, Suvriddhi, Keval, Sughritti, Nara, Chandra, Keval, Bandhuman, 
Veghvan, Buddha, Trinvindu. 
Trinvindu had a daughter Ilavila and a son Vishal. Vishal in later course 
founded Vishala. 
Lineage of Vishal grew as follows- Hemchandra, Chandra, Dhumraksh, Srinjay, 
Sahadev, Krishasva, Somadutta, Janmejaya, Sumati. 
Manu' son Sharayati had a daughter Sukanya who was married to sage 
Chyavan in peculiar circumstances. Anart was the son of Sharayati. Anart had 
a son Raivat who founded his capital at Kushasthali and ruled his kingdom on 
earth. Raivat had one hundred sons, the eldest among whom was Kakudmi. 
He had a daughter Revati. Raivat took Revati with him and approached 
Brahma who asked about a suitable match for her. At that time, Gandharvas 
were singing near Brahma. Raivat listened to their songs intently and forgot 
about the passage of time. Many ages passed like that but Raivat felt as if only 
an hour had passed. When the Gandharvas stopped singing, Raivat once again 
asked Brahma about a suitable match for Revati. Brahma asked Raivat about 
his own choices first. Raivat counted the names of many deserving princes and 
kings all of whom belonged to earth. 
Brahma said smiling- "No one even in the progeny of these people is alive on 
earth because here listening to the Gandharvas songs you have passed four 
ages. Presently even the age of eighteenth Manu is about to end on earth and 

194 
 



Kali Yuga is about to start." These words frightened Raivat who greeted 
Brahma and asked- "O Lord! Now tell me whom should I marry Revati to?" 
Brahma said- "That unborn all pervasive Parmeshwar Lord Vishnu had taken 
an incarnation on earth. O king! Your capital at Kushasthali which was equal to 
Indra's abode Amravati is now Dwarkapuri. In that Dwarkapuri, stays Baldev 
who is a part of Lord Vishnu. 
Marry this daughter to him because she is a jewel among the women folk and 
Baldev is praised all over the world by all. Hence only he deserves to be your 
son-in-law." Hearing the verdict of Brahma, Prajapati Raivat descended on the 
earth and saw that an amazing transformation had taken place in the 
appearance of people who were now smaller in stature, ugly, dull and devoid 
of strength. Even his capital Kushasthali had acquired a new appearance and 
was now known as Dwarkapuri. Raivat found out Baldev and married his 
granddaughter Revati to him. But Revati appeared quite large and taller in 
stature than Baldev because of age difference. Baldev pressed her slightly 
with anterior part of his plough and she assumed a stature equal to normal 
women. After marrying Revati to Baldev, Raivat migrated to the Himalayas to 
observe penance. 
 
CHAPTER TWO  
DESCRIPTION OF IKSHVAKU'S LINEAGE  
Ikshvaku was born from the nostril of Manu as a result of sudden sneezing. 
Ikshvaku had hundred sons among whom Vikukshi, Nimi and Danda were 
prominent.  
Once Ikshvaku organised a Shradha. For the purpose of feeding Brahmins, he 
ordered his son Vikukshi to bring fresh meat of wild animals. Taking his bow 
and arrows, Vikukshi set out for the forest and hunted many deer and rabbits. 
Towards noon, he felt tired and hungry and hence ate one rabbit from the 
stock. Then he reached the capital and handed over the remaining flesh to his 
father. 

195 
 



But the sage Vashishta who was conducting the Shradha revealed the truth to 
Manu. Thus Vikukshi got the name of Shashad and was expelled by his father. 
Shashad in later course had a son, Puranajay. 
In the past a fierce battle had taken place between the demons and the Gods. 
The demons defeated the Gods who approached Lord Vishnu for help. Lord 
Vishnu said-"I am aware of your desire. I will appear in he body of Shashad's 
son Puranajay to kill the demons. But it is your responsibility to convince him 
for the battle."The Gods approached Puranajay and requested-"O great 
among the Kshatriyas! Kindly help us to defeat our enemies." Puranajay said-
"Shatkratu is Indra. If I fight the battle riding his shoulder, I will be able to kill 
the demons." The Gods accepted his condition. Indra took the guise of the bull 
riding which Puranajay killed the demons because Lord Vishnu had partially 
arrived in his body. Since then Puranajay got the name Kakutsth. He had a son 
Aneyna. Lineage of Aneyna grew as follows- Aneyna, Prithu, Vishtrabhva, 
Chandrayuvnashva, Shavasta. Shavasta founded the town of Shavasti (modern 
Shravasti). Lineage of Shavasta continued as follows- Shavasta, Vrihadashva, 
Kuvalayashva, Dridashva, Tandrashva, Kapilashva. 
For a long time, Yuvanashva did not have a child. So, he organised a Putreshti 
Yagya in the auspices of learned sages. The Yagya lasted for a whole day. At 
midnight when the Yagya ended, sages fell asleep because of tiredness 
keeping the urn of Yagya water near the altar. The water had been 
empowered with sacred mantras. Meanwhile the thirsty king came there and 
drank that water from the urn. When the sages awakened, they enquired 
about the water in the urn. Yuvanashva told them that he had himself drunk 
it. The sages told that as the water had been empowered with sacred mantras 
and was meant for the queen in order to make her conceive. 
Hence the king instead of the queen will conceive now. As a result Yuvanashva 
conceived and in due course gave birth to a child from his right armpit. But the 
child's birth did not kill the king. 
The baby was Mandhata. In due course Mandhata ruled the entire earth, 
which was divided into seven islands. 

196 
 



Mandhata married Bindumati, the daughter of Shatabindu. They had three 
sons- Purukutsa, Ambareesh, and Muchukunda. They also had fifty daughters. 
When all the daughters grew young a sage Saubhari arrived in the palace and 
requested Mandhata to marry one of his daughters to him. The sage appeared 
old and frail. So, Mandhata hesitated and tried to send him off making many 
excuses. The sage assured him about his physical abilities. But still the king felt 
hesitant and said-"O sage, it is our tradition that we marry our daughter only 
to he whom our daughter chooses as her husband. Your request is beyond our 
desires." Hearing Mandhata's word sage considered for a moment and said-
"All right O king! Kindly instruct the eunuch who guards the quarters of your 
daughters to escort me there." Fearing a curse from the sage, Mandhata 
instructed the eunuchs to escort him into the quarters of his daughters. While 
entering the quarters, the sage assumed the appearance of an extremely 
handsome Gandharva. So, when he arrived there, a row started among the 
girls as to who would choose him as her husband first. Each one of them 
claimed that she had first chosen him. Thus all the daughters of Mandhata 
chose sage Saubhari as their husband. 
When the eunuchs informed the king about this development, he fell in deep 
thoughts how it could happen. But still he was bound by his promise so he had 
no choice but to marry all his daughters to sage Saubhari. Marrying all the fifty 
girls, sage Saubhari brought them to his hermitage. Calling Vishwakarma, he 
instructed him to build separate castles for each of his wives. In no time, 
Vishwakarma erected fifty beautiful palaces in a row. Each one of them had 
ample spacious and airy rooms, surrounded by beautiful gardens. Since then, 
all the girls occupied those palaces and began to live there. Every kind of 
luxury and food was available to them. 
One day, drawn by the love for his daughters, King Mandhata decided to visit 
Saubhari's ashrama. But in place of ashrama, he found a row of beautiful 
palaces. There, he met his daughters and enquired about their well being. The 
daughters informed him that they were happy to live with the sage and that 
their husband was capable enough to provide them with all the luxuries. But 

197 
 



still they remembered their native place. Each of the girl also expressed one 
grief that her husband enjoyed intimacy with her at all times and did not share 
time with her other sisters. These words of the girls surprised the king. 
Ultimately he met Saubhari and worshipping him he said-"O lord! It is the 
result of your severe penance that you are able to keep all the fifty girls 
happy." Staying there for a few days, the king returned. 
In due course, the daughters of Mandhata gave birth to one hundred and fifty 
sons. Those sons grew up and produced their progeny. At that time sage 
Saubhari thought- 'I have seen the birth of my sons. Now they have their own 
sons. If I stay there, I will long to see my great-grandchildren. 
Desires do not end till death. Acquiring a human body is in itself a great 
sorrow. I have received enough in life, enjoyed intimacy with fifty princesses. 
If I keep more desires, I will receive nothing but sorrow. Hence I should take to 
the penance of Lord Vishnu.' Thinking that way, sage Saubhari migrated to the 
forest along with his fifty wives. There they conducted Yagyas and passed 
their time worshipping Lord Vishnu. 
 
CHAPTER THREE  
MANDHATA, TRISHANKU, AND SAGAR  
Once upon a time Gandharvas of collective name Mauneya defeated the 
Nagas and snatched all their wealth and powers. The Nagas prayed Lord 
Vishnu to rescue them. Lord Vishnu told them that he would appear in 
Mandhata's son Purukutsa and kill the Gandharvas. Afterwards Narmada 
brought Purukutsa to Rasatal where Lord Vishnu appeared in his body. Thus 
having the strength of Lord Vishnu, Purukutsa defeated and killed the 
Gandharvas. Pleased by the action of Narmada, the Nagas blessed her with a 
boon that whoever remembered her would have no fear of snake venom and 
Purukutsa that he would have an immortal son. 
Purukutsa and Narmada had a son Trasadasyu. Lineage of Trasadasyu 
continued as followsTrasadasyu, Anaranya, Vrihadashva, Haryashva, Hasta, 

198 
 



Sumana, Tridhanva, Trayaruni and Satyavrat. Satyavrat became famous as 
Trishanku in later course. By the curse of a sage, Trishanku had become a 
Chandala.  
Once a drought occurred for twelve long years. During that drought, to get rid 
from this condition of Chandala and feed sage Vishwamitra, Trishanku used to 
tie a whole skinned deer to a Banyan tree on the bank of the river Ganges. 
Pleased by his selfless service, sage Vishwamitra sent Trishanku to the heaven 
with his ephemeral body. 
Lineage of Trishanku grew as follows- Trishanku, Harishchandra, Rohitashva, 
Harit, Chanchu, Vijay, and Vasudev. Vijay had a son Ruruk. Ruruk's son was 
Vrik who had a son Bahu. Bahu had two queens. After a long time of their 
marriage, Bahu's queen consort conceived a son. But the circumstances took a 
strange turn. Bahu's enemies together attacked his kingdom and defeated 
him. The defeated king migrated to the forest along with his queens and 
began to live at the hermitage of sage Aurv. Very soon, King Bahu died of old 
age. His queen consort also wanted to commit Sati but sage Aurv prevented 
her from doing so. After sometime getting envious of her fortune, the other 
queen deceitfully fed her with poison. But the poison could not harm the 
foetus, which stayed unborn for a period of seven years because of poison's 
effect. 
Staying at the hermitage of sage Aurv, the queen consort gave birth to a son. 
Since the child was born with the effect of the poison, Sage Aurv named him 
as Sagar. Sagar began to grow in he hermitage in natural surrounding. One day 
he asked his mother about his father. The queen narrated the whole incident 
to him. Sagar then and there took an oath to exterminate the Kshatriyas who 
had been the cause of his father's death. Acting as per his oath, Sagar 
destroyed Haihaya Kshatriyas whereas Shak Kshatriyas got their heads shaven 
out of fear. Since those Kshatriyas had given up their religion, hence Brahmins 
boycotted them. As a result they became Malechchha. Thereafter King Sagar 
returned to his capital and ruled the earth. 
 

199 
 



CHAPTER FOUR  
DESCRIPTION OF SURYAVANSH  
King Sagar had two queens, Sumati, the daughter of Kashyapa and Keshini, the 
daughter of Vidarbha's king. Keshini had a son Asmanjas whereas Sumati had 
sixty thousand sons. 
Anshuman was the son of Asmanjas. Asmanjas was very whimsical since his 
childhood. Even in his youth, he did not change his behaviour. Hence King 
Sagar had abandoned Asmanjas. But the things did not improve for Sagar 
because even his sixty thousand sons followed the footsteps of Asmanjas. 
The Gods one-day approached sage Kapila who was a partial incarnation of 
Lord Vishnu. 
Greeting him, they said- "If the sixty thousand sons of Sagar continued on 
their whimsical way, the earth would not remain suitable for living." Sage 
Kapila assured the Gods that the sixty thousand sons of Sagar would meet 
their fate very soon. By the instigation of sage Kapila, King Sagar organised an 
Ashwamedha Yagya. 
The sixty thousand princes also followed the horse guarding it. But somehow 
Indra managed to kidnap the horse and tethered it at the hermitage of sage 
Kapila. The sixty thousand princes searched for the horse and following the 
footprints, they also reached the hermitage. There they found the horse and 
also a sage in deep meditation. Thinking that the sage might have been 
responsible for abduction of the horse they began to abuse him. As soon as 
sage Kapila disturbed by the abuses opened his eyes, a flame appeared and 
incinerated all the sixty thousand princes. 
When King Sagar came to know about this incident, he sent Anshuman to 
bring back that horse. 
Anshuman also reached the hermitage and greeted sage Kapila with respect. 
Pleased by his politeness, sage Kapila blessed Anshuman and instructed him to 
take the horse away with him. 

200 
 



He also asked him to seek a boon. As the boon, Anshuman only sought the 
salvation for his sixty thousand dead uncles. Sage Kapila assured Anshuman 
that his ancestors would certainly attain to the heaven but only after a long 
wait and that his grandson Bhagirath would bring the Ganges onto the earth 
and that the Ganges' waters would wash the ashes of his ancestors to the 
ocean and cause their salvation. Thus blessed by the sae Kapila, Anshuman 
returned to the capital with the horse in order to help his grand father finish 
the Yagya. Anshuman had a son Dileep. Dileep's son was Bhagirath who 
observed severe penance and pleased Ganga to descend on the earth. Since 
the Ganges had descended on earth because of Bhagirath's penance, she also 
got a name Bhagirathi. 
The lineage of Bhagirath grew as follows- Bhagirath, Suhotra, Shruti, Nabhag, 
Ambareesh, Sindhudweep, Ayutayu, Rituparn, Sarvakam, Sudas, and Saudas. 
One day, King Saudas went hunting in the forests. There he spotted a pair of 
the tigers. They were actually a tiger and a tigress in mating. Saudas killed one 
of them by his arrow, while the other turned into a demon and threatening of 
an avenge disappeared from the scene. 
In due course, King Saudas organised a Yagya in the auspices of sage 
Vashishta. Towards the end of Yagya, sage Vashishta went away to take bath. 
Meanwhile the same demon arrived there in the guise of Vashishta and 
expressed his desire to eat non-vegetarian food. Then the demon arrived 
before the king in the guise of the cook. The king ordered him to cook meat 
for the sage. 
The cook cooked human flesh and served it before the sage. Sage Vashishta 
knew that the food contained human flesh. He cursed the king in anger to be a 
demon. Within three days, King Saudas became a demon and began to roam 
in the forests. Since then he ate the humans only. 
One day, Saudas in demon form saw Muni who was in the process of mating 
his wife. The demon caught and ate the Muni neglecting all the cries and 
wailing of his wife. The Brahmani angrily cursed the demon that as her 

201 
 



husband had been killed while he was about to sate his carnal lust similarly he 
would also die right in the same process. 
King Saudas remained in the demon's form for twelve more years. After that 
he recovered from the curse and began to rule like a pious king. One day, King 
Saudas saw the queen in an amorous condition and an impulse of carnal 
pleasure ran within his body. He made advances to satisfy his lust but the 
queen who knew everything about the curse stopped him reminding him of 
the curse. 
Since then the king stuck to celibacy. Since the king had no son, he allowed his 
queen Madayanti to conceive a child with the help of sage Vashishta. The 
queen did conceive but the foetus remained unborn for seven years at length. 
At last the irritated queen hit her foetus with a stone. 
This resulted in the birth of child at once. The child was named Ashmak. The 
lineage of Ashmak grew as follows: Ashmak, Moolak, Dasharath, Ilivil, 
Vishvasah, and Khatwang. Khatwang had killed many formidable demons 
fighting by the side of the Gods. Pleased by his gallantry, the Gods wanted to 
grant him a boon. Khatwang wanted to know how long would live more. The 
Gods told him that he would live for one Muhurta more. Hearing this, 
Khatwang came back on earth and prayed Lord Vishnu to take him in His 
refuge. At last he did annihilated with Lord Vishnu. 
Lineage of Khatwang grew as follows-Khatwang, Deerghbahu, Raghu, Aja, and 
Dasharath. King Dasharath had three queens who gave birth to four sons- 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Shatrughana. 
Rama was an incarnation of Lord Vishnu. His life too had lot of ups and downs. 
After being trained in archery, He and Lakshmana spent most of their 
boyhood time in the hermitage of sage Vishwamitra guarding his Yagyas from 
the demons. After that when Vishwamitra was taking them to Mithila Lord 
Rama saved Ahilya who had been converted into a stone by the curse of her 
husband sage Gautam. In Mithila, Lord Rama broke the bow of Lord Shiva and 
won Sita as His wife. When they returned to Ayodhya, King Dasharath decided 

202 
 



to crown Rama as the new king. But misguided by Manthara, queen Kaikeyee 
stubbornly sought that her son Bharata should be crowned as the new king 
whereas Rama should be sent on an exile for fourteen years. 
Bounded by his promises that he had made to Kaikeyee earlier, King 
Dasharath had no choice but to accept her demands. 
Thus to keep His father's words, Lord Rama accepted the exile. Sita and 
Lakshmana also followed His steps. In the forests, the demon king Ravana 
deceitfully abducted Sita. It was followed by meeting of Rama with Hanuman 
and Sugriva, killing of Bali- Sugriva's brother, finding of Sita by Hanuman in 
Lanka, bridging of the sea that separated Lanka, fierce battle with the demons 
and ultimately killing of Ravana by Lord Rama. After the completion of exile 
period Lord Rama returned to Ayodhya and ruled there for twelve years. 
Lord Rama had two sons- Lava and Kusha. Lineage of Kusha grew as follows- 
Kusha, Atithi, Nishadh, Anal, Nabh, Pundareek, Kshemdhanwa, Devaneek, 
Ahinaka, Ruru, Pariyatrak, Deval, Vanchal, Ulka, Vajranabha, Shankhan, 
Yushhitashva, Vishvasaha, Hiranyanam, Pushya, Dhruvasandhi, Sudarshan, 
Agnivarn, Shighrag, Maru, Prasushrut, Susandhi, Amarsh, Sahaswan and 
Vishvabhav. Vishvabhav had a son Brihdal who was killed by Abhimanyu in the 
battle of Mahabharata. 
 
CHAPTER FIVE  
TALE OF NIMI AND DESCRIPTION OF HIS LINEAGE  
Ikshvaku's son Nimi once decided to organise a Yagya that was to last for one 
thousand years. 
He also wanted the sage Vashishta to guide the Yagya. But Indra had already 
booked Vashishta for a period of five hundred years. So sage Vashishta 
expressed his inability to conduct any other Yagya till the completion of that 
period and requested the king to wait till he was free from Indra's obligations. 
Nimi kept quite at that time. Taking his silence as an approval, the sage began 

203 
 



the Yagya for Indra. But the king meanwhile started Yagya in the auspices of 
other sages like Gautam etc. 
At the completion of Yagya for Indra, sage Vashishta hurried back to the earth 
to conduct Yagya for King Nimi. But here he found that a Yagya was already in 
progression. This infuriated the sage to the extent that he poured down curse 
on Nimi, who was sleeping at that time, to lose his body at once. When the 
king learned about the curse and that he was cursed in sleep, he cursed the 
sage in retaliation to lose his body at once before giving up his own body. By 
the curse of Nimi, Vashishta's body was destroyed but he himself entered the 
semen of Mitra-Varuna. 
Thereafter, one day Mitra-Varuna happened to see the apsara Urvashi. Her 
amorous beauty caused the ejaculation of his semen spontaneously. With 
ejaculated semen, sage Vashishta also came out and acquired a new body.On 
the other hand, at end of Yagya when the Gods appeared to accept their due 
share from the offerings, the sages prayed them to grant Nimi some boon. 
Nimi however sought nothing in boon but expressed his desire to stay in eyes 
of the people forever. The Gods granted that desire. 
Before that nobody had ever blinked his eyes. Blinking of eyes came into 
practice because Nimi stays there. In order to save the kingdom from anarchy, 
the sages churned the dead body of Nimi with a stick of Bombax tree and 
produced a son. That son came to known as Janaka. Since he was born from 
the dead body of his father, the boy also came to be known as Vaideha. 
Lineage of Janaka continued as follows: Janaka, Udavasu, Nandivardhan, 
Suketu, Devrat, Brihadukth, Mahaveerya, Sudhriti, Dhrishtketu, Haryashva, 
Manu, Prateet, Kritrath, Devbheed, Vibudh, Mahadhriti, Kritraj, Maharoma, 
Suvarnaroma, Hrasyaroma and Seerdhvaj. With a desire of a son, Seerdhvaj 
was once ploughing the earth when he stumbled upon a pitcher. In the 
pitcher, he found a beautiful baby whom he named as Sita. 
 
CHAPTER SIX  

204 
 



DESCRIPTION OF SOMA VANSH AND TALE OF PURURAVA  
The creator of the world, Brahma had a son named Atri. Chandrama was the 
son of Atri.  
Once Chandrama organised a Rajsuya Yagya and received great powers. 
Afterwards blinded by his powers, Chandrama kidnapped Tara, the wife of 
Brihaspati. Even his grandfather Brahma tried to dissuade him from 
committing such a grave crime but Chandrama was not to listen to anybody. 
Because his hostility with Brihaspati, the teacher of the demons Shukra was 
also assisting Chandrama. At that moment of need, only Rudra came forward 
to help Brihaspati. A fierce battle followed between Chandrama and Rudra. 
The Gods were helping Brihaspati while because of Shukra, the demons fought 
from the side of Chandrama. Soon the battle assumed the proportion of a war 
that perplexed the entire world. At last, Lord Vishnu mediated to end the 
battle and helped Brihaspati to get his wife back. By that time Tara had 
conceived a child. Seeing her condition Brihaspati instigated Tara to abort the 
baby. Tara aborted the baby amidst some shrubs but it did not die. Instead, 
his brilliance dulled even the radiance of the Gods. 
The baby was so beautiful that both Brihaspati and Chandrama were eager to 
accept him. To settle the matter, Brahma asked Tara about the paternity of 
the child. Feeling shy, Tara revealed that Chandrama was the father of the 
child. Then Brahma himself adopted the child and named him as Buddha. 
When he grew young, Buddha produced Pururava from Illa. Pururava was very 
magnanimous and handsome.  
Once an apsara Urvashi happened to see him and at once fell in love. She then 
approached Pururava. Her beauty enchanted Pururava also. He requested the 
apsara to stay with him. But Urvashi stipulated that she might stay with him if 
he agreed to follow her two conditions that he would never drive the two 
sheep, which were like her children away from her bed and that he would 
never undress before her in visible light. Pururava accepted both the 
conditions. Since then Pururava began to live with Urvashi. Together they 

205 
 



enjoyed their physical intimacy for sixty thousand years. Their love grew so 
much that even Urvashi forgot those heavenly comforts that she used to enjoy 
once. Because of her absence, even the heaven appeared more dreaded than 
hell.At last, one Vishvavasu who knew about the conditions stole one sheep 
from their bedroom and flew away. Hearing the cries of the sheep, Urvashi 
got up in anxiety and shouted who was stealing her son. But Pururava 
pretended as if asleep for the fear of being seen naked. As the fuss grew 
further, he could no more contain himself and ran after the thief. Right at that 
moment, the Gandharvas produced intense lightning illuminating the whole 
scene. As a result, Urvashi saw Pururava in a naked state and at once left his 
palace to her heavenly abode for now both of her conditions had been 
violated. Pururava could not tolerate the separation of Urvashi. He began to 
roam here and there in that bare condition like a mad. Thus roaming he 
reached at Kamal Sarovar in Kurukshetra where he saw Urvashi with four 
other elves. Seeing Urvashi Pururava began to behave madly. It was 
impossible for him to control his sensual desires even in the presence of other 
elves. But Urvashi stopped him saying that she was expecting an issue and 
after a year, she will give birth to his child. She also promised at that time she 
will stay with him for a night. 
After a year King Pururava once again reached that place where Urvashi 
handed over his son Ayu. As per her promise she also stayed with Pururava for 
a night and consequently in later course gave birth to five more sons. Urvashi 
informed Pururava that because of their love Gandharvas wished to bless him 
with a boon. Pururava sought a life-long union with Urvashi. 
Gandharvas presented him with an altar and instructed to conduct regular 
Yagyas properly. Then all of his desires would come true, the Gandharvas 
assured Pururava. But King Pururava left that altar in the forest and returned 
to his capital. At mid-night, he awakened suddenly as if from a trance and 
hurried to the forest to recover his altar. But the altar was no more there; it 
had transformed into a peepal tree. Pururava got that tree felled and brought 
it to his capital where the carpenters made Arani (a wooden implement used 

206 
 



in ancient India to produce fire) from its wood. Since then Pururava conducted 
regular Yagyas with the help of that Arani and attained to the Gandharvaloka 
where he was never separated from Urvashi again. 
 
CHAPTER SEVEN  
BIRTH OF JAMADAGNI AND VISHWAMITRA  
Pururava had six sons- Ayu, Amavasu, Vishwavasu, Shrutayu, Shatayu and 
Ayutayu. Amavasu had a son Bhima and Bhima in turn had a son Kanchan. 
Jahnu was the son of Kanchan's son, Suhotra. At the time of Ganga's descend 
on earth, when Jahnu saw his hermitage inundated, he drank all her water. He 
released the Ganges only when the DevRishis prayed him. Since then Ganges 
also came to be known as Jahnavi, the daughter of Jahnu. 
Lineage of Jahnu grew as follows- Jahnu, Sumant, Ajak, Balakashva and Kusha. 
Kusha had four sons- Kushamb, Kushnam, Adhurtraja and Vasu. Kushamb 
observed severe penance with a desire to have a son like Indra. Pleased by his 
penance, Indra himself took birth as his son. He came to be known as Kaushik. 
Kaushik had a daughter named Satyavati who got married to Richeek. Sage 
Richeek prepared kheer in two parts- one for his wife Satyavati and another 
for Satyavati's mother. Instructing Satyavati, he went to the forest. 
When Satyavati and her mother were about to eat the kheer, her mother 
exchanged her part of kheer with that of her daughter saying that her son had 
to foster the world while the son of the sage had nothing to do with wealth 
and all that. Satyavati agreed to that and ate that part of kheer, which was 
reserved for her mother whereas her mother ate Satyavati's part. When 
Richeek returned from the forest, he noticed formidable changes in the body 
of his wife. He understood that she had eaten her mother's part of the kheer. 
Angrily the sage predicted that she would have a son who would be Kshatriya-
like in virtues whereas her mother would have Brahmin-like son. 
Satyavati begged pardon and requested the sage to change his prediction 
saying that the crime was committed by mistake and that she would be happy 

207 
 



to have a Kshatriya-like grandson but not a son. At her request the sage 
changed his prediction. 
As per the prediction, Satyavati gave birth to Jamadagni whereas her mother 
gave birth to Vishwamitra. After giving birth to Jamadagni turned into a river 
named Kaushiki. 
In later course, as a partial incarnation of Lord Vishnu, Parashurama took birth 
as the son of sage Jamadagni. 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT  
DESCRIPTION OF KASHYA VANSH  
Pururava's son Ayu had been married to Rahu's daughter. They had five sons- 
Nahush, Kshatravriddh, Rambh, Vraji and Aneyna. Suhotra was the son of 
Kshatravriddh. He had three sons- Kashya, Kash and Gritsamad. Shaunak was 
the son of Gritsamad whereas Kasheya was the son of Kashya. Lineage of 
Kasheya grew as- Kasheya, Rashtra, Dirdhakapa, and Dhanvantari. 
Dhanvantari's body was free from all the physical faults like ageing and 
diseases. 
Dhanvantari's lineage grew as- Dhanvantari, Ketuman, Bheemrath, Dibodas 
and Pratardan. 
Pratardan was also known as Shatrujit because of his conquering his enemies. 
Since he had acquired a horse named Kulavay hence he also came to be 
known as Kulvayashva. Pratardan had a son named Alarka who enjoyed his 
rule on earth for sixty-six thousand years. 
Lineage of Alarka continued as follows- Sannati, Sunith, Suketu, Dharmaketu, 
Satyaketu, Vibhu, Suvibhu, Sukumar, Dhristhaketu, Vitihotra, Bharga and 
Bhargbhumi. It was progeny of Bhargbhumi who gave rise to four classes of 
people. 
 
CHAPTER NINE  

208 
 



DESCRIPTION OF KING RAJI AND HIS SONS  
King Raji had five hundred prowessive sons.  
Once at the beginning of battle between the demons and the Gods, they 
appeared before Brahma and enquired as to which part would win. Brahma 
said that only that part would win which would be aided by King Raji. First the 
demons approached Raji and requested him to fight from their side. King Raji 
stipulated that he would fight only when the demons agreed to appoint him 
as their Indra. The demons told him that Prahlada was their Indra and 
returned. Then the Gods also approached King Raji and requested him to take 
their side. Raji put the same condition before them also to which the Gods 
agreed. 
In a fierce battle and aided by King Raji, the Gods defeated the demons. After 
their victory, Indra bowed before King Raji and expressed his desire to present 
him with the kingdom of heaven. Thus King Raji became Indra. After the 
demise of Raji, Narada instigated his sons to acquire the rule of heaven. All the 
five hundred sons of Raji approached Indra and requested him to give them 
the rule of heaven but Indra refused plainly. At that Raji's sons dethroned 
Indra forcibly and themselves became Indra. After much time had passed, 
Indra approached Brihaspati and prayed him to help him regain the rule of 
heaven. Brihaspati assured him that he would soon establish him at the 
throne. 
Afterwards Brihaspati created illusions in the minds of Raji's sons. He also 
conducted many Yagyas to increase the radiance of Indra. Guided by the 
illusions, Raji's sons began to behave in anti-religious ways. Then Indra easily 
killed them all and regained his designation. 
 
CHAPTER TEN  
TALE OF YAYATI  
Nahush had six sons- Yati, Yayati, Sanyati, Ayati, Viyati and Kriti. Yayati had 
two wives, Devyani, the daughter of Shukracharya and Sharmishtha, the 

209 
 



daughter of Vrishparva. Devyani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu whereas 
Sharmishtha gave birth to Druhayu, Anu and Puru. 
Because of a curse of Shukracharya old age had descended on Yayati 
prematurely. 
Yayati then requested his eldest son Yadu to exchange his youth with his old 
age but Yadu refused. Then Yayati requested each of his sons one by one but 
all of them refused plainly for the fear of getting old prematurely. 
At last Yayati's youngest son Puru gladly accepted his request and gave him his 
youth. 
Regaining the youth, Yayati once again indulged in carnal pleasures with both 
his queens. But everyday his desire for pleasures increased like a fire flared up 
by ghee. After one thousand years Yayati realised his mistake and decided to 
expiate for his sin. Thus, Yayati returned Puru his youth and acquired his old 
age once again. Then crowning Puru as the king, he took an exile to the forest. 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN  
YADU VANSH AND TALE OF SAHASTRARJUNA  
Yayati's eldest son Yadu had four sons- Sahastrajit, Kroshtu, Nala and Nahush. 
Sahastrajit had a son Shatajit who had three sons Haihaya, Hehaya and 
Venuhaya. Lineage of Haihaya grew asDharma, Dharmanetra, Kunti, Sahajit, 
Mahishman, Bhadrashrenya, Durdabh and Dhanak. 
Dhanak had four sons- Kritveerya, Kritagni, Kritdharma and Kritauja. 
Kritveerya had a prowessive son Arjuna. Arjuna had worshipped Dattatreya 
and by his blessings acquired one thousand arms. Since then he came to be 
known as Sahastrarjuna. Dattatreya had blessed him with many other boons 
like rule of entire earth, fostering of his subjects in religious ways and killing by 
some human being famous in all the three worlds. At that time, there was no 
other king equal to Sahastrarjuna in virtues. He ruled the entire earth for 
eighty-five thousand years. 

210 
 



Once Sahastrarjuna was enjoying his past time on the waters of Narmada 
when he happened to have an encounter with Ravana, the king of Lanka. 
Sahastrarjuna captured Ravana easily and imprisoned him at an isolated place 
in his kingdom. With time ego of SahastrArjuna had crossed all limits. He 
began to terrorise the sages and other religious people. When his atrocities 
increased beyond tolerance level, Lord Vishnu took a partial incarnation as 
Parashurama, the son of sage Jamadagni and Renuka. As per the prediction of 
sage Richeek, Parashurama grew with Kshatriya - like virtues. He had in fact 
taken incarnation to relieve the earth from the atrocities of egoist kings. 
Parashurama had received arms training from none other than Lord Shiva. He 
was very obedient to his father and had beheaded his own mother by the 
Parashu (axe) that he had received from Lord Shiva at the dictate of his father. 
In due course Parashurama not only got Ravana released from captivity but 
also killed Sahastrarjuna. 
Sahastrarjuna had one hundred sons among whom Shur, Shursena, 
Vrishasena, Madhu and Jayadhwaj were prominent. Jayadhwaj had a son 
Taljunga. Taljunga had one hundred sons among whom Vitihotra and Bharata 
were prominent. Bharata again had one hundred sons whereas Madhu also 
had hundred sons among whom Vrishni was prominent. After the name of 
their forefather Yadu, this clan came to be known as Yaduvansha. 
 
CHAPTER TWELVE  
DESCRIPTION OF KROSHTU VANSH  
Lineage of Kroshtu grew as follows- Kroshtu, Dhwajnivan, Swati, Rushanku, 
Chitrarath, Rashibindu. Rashibindu had one lakh queens and ten lakh sons 
among whom Prithusharva, Prithukarma, Prithukirti, Prithuyasha, Prithujay 
and Prithushan were prominent. In their lineage later on occurred a king 
named Jyamadh. He was so dedicated to his wife Shaivya that despite being 
childless, he did not dare to marry other women because of her fear.  

211 
 



Once, Jyamadh took part in a fierce battle in which he defeated all his 
enemies. While he was about to return, he heard pitiable cries of a woman. 
He saw a beautiful young lady who was crying for her protection. Jyamadh 
was so infatuated by her beauty that he took her to his kingdom. When they 
reached at the gate of the palace, the king saw that the queen Shaivya was 
waiting for him along with a big crowd. When Shaivya saw a beautiful young 
lady sitting beside the king on the chariot, she began to shout at him. The 
horrified king tried to explain that the young lady was his daughter-in-law. The 
queen shouted even louder that when they did not have a son, whence the 
daughter-in-law came. But the king explained that he had selected a wife for 
her would-be son. 
As the effect of their conversation queen Shaivya soon conceived and gave 
birth to a son inspite of her advancing age. They named the son as Vidarbh. In 
due course of time, Vidarbh got married to that lady whom his father had 
brought home earlier. They had three sons- Krath, Kaushik and Romapad. 
Romapad had received preaching from Narada. Lineage of Krath grew as 
follows- Krath, Kunti, Ghrishti, Nighriti, Dashard, Vyoma, Jimoot, Vikriti, 
Bheemrath, Navrath, Dasharath, Shakuni, Karambhi, Devrat, Devakshatra, 
Madhu, Kumarvansh, Anu, Kurumitra, Anshu, Satvak. Satvak was the 
forefather of a clan that was named after him. 
 
PART FIVE  
CHAPTER ONE  
PURU VANSH  
The lineage of Puru grew as Puru, Janmejaya, Prachinvan, Praveer, Manasyu, 
Abhayad, Sudayu, Bahugat, Sanyati, Ahamyati, Raudrashva. Raudrashva had 
ten sons among whom Riteshu was the most prominent. Riteshu had three 
sons among whom Apratirath was most prominent. 

212 
 



Lineage of Apratirath is as follows- Apratirath, Aileen, Dushyant and Bharata. 
King Dushyant had fallen in love with Shakuntala, the daughter of sage 
Vishwamitra and apsara Menaka. 
They got married secretly in the forest and after a few days, King Dushyant 
returned to his kingdom promising Shakuntala that he would call her as soon 
as he reached his palace. He had given Shakuntala his ring as a memento. But 
while Shakuntala was crossing the river on her way to the palace, the ring 
slipped from her finger and was swallowed by a fish. In the absence of the 
ring, King Dushyant refused to identify Shakuntala. So, she returned to the 
hermitage of sage Vishwamitra and gave birth to a child who later on became 
famous as Bharata. 
Bharata had been very prowessive since his childhood. His first meeting with 
King Dushyant was also very dramatical. It is said that once King Dushyant was 
hunting in the forest and he saw a boy who was counting the teeth of a lion. 
Impressed by the bravery of the boy, the king enquired about his parentage 
and reached the hermitage where sage Vishwamitra narrated him the whole 
story. Meanwhile a fisherman had also recovered the ring from the fish and 
handed it to the king who had thus recalled the whole story. In the hermitage, 
King Dushyant came to see Shakuntala and he candidly accepted her and his 
son Bharata. Bharata had three queens and nine children. Since none of the 
children resembled him in features, he expressed his doubts about their 
paternity. Fearing the wrath of Bharata, his queens killed all the children. Then 
with a desire to have a son, Bharata organised a Marutsoma Yagya. As a result 
he got Bharadwaj as his son. Bharadwaj's second name was Vitath. His lineage 
grew as follows- Vitath, Manyu. 
Manyu had many sons like Brihatkshatra, Mahaveer, Nara, Garg etc. Their 
lineage grew as follows Nara, Sanskriti, Gurupreeti and Rantidev. Garg had a 
son Shini who became famous as Gargya and Shainya also. Mahaveer lineage 
is as follows- Durukshay, Trayyaruni, Pushkarinya and Kapi. In the lineage of 
Brihatkshatra occurred a king Hasti who founded the city of Hastinapur. Hasti 
had three sons- Ajmirh, Dwijmirh and Purumirh. Among the sons of Ajmirh 

213 
 



were included Panchals and a daughter Ahilya. Ahilya was married to sage 
Gautam. They had a son Shatanand. Satyaghriti was the son of Shatanand.  
Once Satyaghriti happened to sight the extremely amorous and beautiful 
apsara Urvashi. Her mere sight was enough to cause the ejaculation of his 
semen, which fell on a reed and divided into two parts. From these two parts 
were born a boy Krip and a girl Kripi. King Shantanu discovered Krip and Kripi 
in the forest and brought them to his palace. In later course, Kripi was married 
to Dronacharya, the teacher of Kauravas and Pandavas. Ashwatthama was the 
son of Dronacharya. One of the kings named Kuru in the lineage of Ajmirh 
established the sacred region of Kurukshetra. 
 
CHAPTER TWO  
DESCRIPTION OF KURU VANSH  
In the lineage of Kuru, there occurred a King Prateep. He had three sons- 
Devapi, Shantanu and Vahlik. Devapi had taken an abode in the forest in his 
childhood. Hence Shantanu came to become a king after their father Prateep. 
Once in the kingdom of King Shantanu, there was no rainfall for twelve years. 
Perplexed by the continuous drought-like situation, Shantanu consulted 
learned Brahmins. Brahmins informed him that he had no genuine right on the 
kingdom, which in fact belonged to his brother Devapi. They also told him that 
as long as Devapi was not fallen from his supreme position, the drought would 
continue. Alternatively, handing over the kingdom to Devapi might also result 
in the end of the drought. Then Shantanu's minister Ashmasari appointed 
certain Brahmins who always spoke in anti-Vedas ways. Their continuous 
preaching disinclined Devapi's mind from Vedas. 
On the other hand one day, King Shantanu proceeded towards the forest 
along with Brahmins and his courtiers to hand over the kingdom to Devapi. 
There the Brahmins tried to convince Devapi to accept the onus of the 
kingdom. They were sighting anecdotes from the Vedas to corroborate their 
argument. But Devapi criticised Vedas and spoke in anti-religious ways. At that 

214 
 



Brahmins instructed the king to return to the kingdom, as there was no use to 
convince Devapi. 
They also assured Shantanu that since Devapi had been disinclined from 
Vedas, he had lost his right to the kingdom and the famine would also come to 
an end. 
Shantanu's younger brother Vahlik had a son Somadutta. Bhuri, Bhurishrava 
and Shalya were the sons of Somadutta. In later course Shantanu got married 
to Ganga and had a son Bhisma. From his second wife Satyavati, Shantanu had 
two sons- Chitrangad and Vichitraveerya. Chitrangad was killed by a 
Gandharva whereas younger Vichitraveerya was married to the princesses of 
Kashi, Ambika and Ambalika. He was so busy in carnal pleasures with his two 
wives that soon he contracted tuberculosis and died. Despite their indulgence 
in carnal pleasures, Ambika and Ambalika could not bear a child from 
Vichitraveerya. Hence in order to continue their lineage, Satyavati inspired 
Ambika and Ambalika to appear naked before Veda Vyasa and beget a child. 
Since Ambika closed her eyes while she appeared naked before Veda Vyasa, 
she begot a blind son, Dhritarashtra. Similarly, Ambalika grew pale when she 
appeared naked before Veda Vyasa. 
Hence she begot a son Pandu who was congenitally afflicted with jaundice. 
Not satisfied by the outcome, Satyavati once again persuaded Ambika and 
Ambalika to appear naked before Veda Vyasa. But the queens sent a 
maidservant Vinita before Veda Vyasa. Vinita appeared naked before Veda 
Vyasa without any fear or shyness. Hence she begot an extremely wise son 
Vidura. 
In later course Dhritarashtra got married to Gandhari, the princess of 
Kandahar whereas Pandu received two wives Kunti, the daughter of Shoorsen 
and Madri, the princess of Madra. 
Dhritarashtra had one hundred sons and a daughter Dushala. Duryodhan was 
the eldest among the one hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. Pandu on the other 
hand had five sons among whom Yudhisthira was the eldest. 

215 
 



All the five sons of Pandu were born with the help of five Gods- Dharma, Vayu, 
Indra and Ashwini Kumars because Pandu was carrying a curse that he would 
die if he ever tried to copulate. Pandu's five sons- Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjuna, 
Nakul and Sahadev came to be known as Pandavas. Five Pandavas were 
married to Draupadi, the daughter of Panchal King Drupad. 
From Draupadi each of the Pandavas had a son. Their names were Prativindya 
from Yudhisthira, Shrutsen from Bhima, Shrutkirti from Arjuna, Shrutaneek 
from Nakul and Shrutkarma from Sahadev. Besides them Yudhisthira had a 
son Devak from Yaudheyi. From Hidimba, Bhima had a son Ghatotkachch and 
from Kashi a son Sarvak. From Vijaya, Sahadev had a son Suhotra whereas 
from Renumati, Nakul had a son Nirmitra. Arjuna was the most prowessive 
among the Pandavas. Apart from Draupadi he had three more wives- Ulupi 
who belonged to the Nagas, Chitrangada, the princess of Manipur and 
Subhadra, the sister of Lord Krishna. From these three wives Arjuna had three 
sons-Iravan from Ulupi, Vabhruvahan from Chitrangada and Abhimanyu from 
Subhadra. In the battle of Mahabharata all these sons of the Pandavas fought 
valiantly and sacrificed their lives. It was Abhimanyu's son Parikshit who 
continued the lineage of Pandavas and ruled the earth till right now. 
 
CHAPTER THREE  
INCARNATION OF LORD KRISHNA  
Vasudev, the son of Shoorsen was married to Devaki, the daughter of Devak. 
On that occasion of their marriage, Devaki's cousin Kansa was driving their 
chariot. At that time, a celestial voice declared that the eighth son of Devaki 
would kill Kansa. Kansa in the excitement was ready to kill Devaki ten and 
there but Vasudev convinced him saying that he would himself hand over all 
his children to him. Thus assured by Vasudev, Kansa dropped the idea of 
killing Devaki. 
When the marriage of Vasudev and Devaki was taking place, Prithvi 
approached Brahma in the guise of a cow. She complained to Brahma that 

216 
 



population of mean-minded people was increasing and that she was not more 
able to bear the burden of their anti-religious deeds. Prithvi said- "O Lord! The 
same demon Kalnemi whom Lord Vishnu had killed in his previous birth has 
taken incarnation of Kansa, the son of Ugrasena. Many other fearsome 
demons Arishth, Dhenuk, Keshi, Pralamb, Sunda, Banasura and many more 
have taken over the rule and tormenting the religious people in many ways. 
They keep million strong forces. I am unable to bear their burden. So kindly do 
something to get me rid of this burden." Hearing the words of Prithvi, Brahma 
said to the Gods- "Prithvi speaks the truth. Indeed she is carrying too much 
burden. Let us all go to the shore of Ksheersagar and pray Lord Vishnu and 
intimate Him about all this matter." Then accompanied by the Gods, Brahma 
arrived at the coast of Ksheersagar and prayed Lord Vishnu. Pleased by their 
prayer, Lord Vishnu appeared before them in His universal form and said- 
"Brahma! Believe my words and be assured that whatever you and these Gods 
desire shall realise." Thus assured by the Lord all the Gods and Brahma prayed 
once again. Pleased by their prayer, Lord Vishnu plucked a black and a white 
hair from his head and said-"Both these hair of mine shall take incarnation on 
earth and remove the miseries that the people face there. All of you take 
partial incarnation on earth to attenuate the strength of the demons. This 
black hair of mine shall take birth as the eighth son of Devaki and kill Kansa 
who is an re-incarnation of Kalnemi." While this conversation was on, 
Devarshi Narada appeared before Kansa and informed him that Lord Vishnu 
would take birth as the eighth son of Devaki. Hearing the words of Narada, 
Kansa angrily put Vasudev and Devaki behind the bars. There in his abode, 
Lord Vishnu instructed Mahamaya (personified illusion) to implant the six 
foetuses who were in Patal in the womb of Devaki, one by one. He knew that 
all of them would be killed by Kansa. Then he instructed Mahamaya to implant 
his part Shesha who would appear as the seventh issue of Devaki, in the 
womb of Rohini, the second wife of Vasudev so that he could appear as her 
son instead of Devaki's. Lord instructed Mahamaya to appear in the womb of 
Yashoda in Gokul while He Himself would appear as the eighth issue of Devaki. 
He also told Mahamaya that He would take birth on the eighth day of the 

217 
 



darker phase in the month of Bhadrapad while she would take birth on the 
ninth day and that immediately after His birth, Vasudev would himself carry 
Him to Gokul and leaving me beside Yashoda, he would carry her back to 
Mathura.  
CHAPTER FOUR  
APPEARANCE OF LORD IN DEVAKI'S WOMB  
As per the dictate of Lord Vishnu, YogaMaya implanted six foetuses in the 
womb of Devaki. All the six children were killed by Kansa immediately after 
their birth. Yogamaya transplanted the seventh issue of Devaki into the womb 
of Rohini who was residing at that time in Gokul. Then Lord Himself appeared 
as the eighth issue of Devaki. Since the time of His arrival, radiance of Devaki 
increased manifold. At the same time, Yogamaya also appeared as an issue of 
Yashoda in Gokul. Seeing the arrival of Lord Himself as the eighth issue of 
Devaki, the Gods prayed Him with devotion. 
Then on the eighth day in the darker phase of Bhadrapad, Lord took birth. At 
the time of His birth, the wind suspended its motion. The reverse attained 
extremely purified state whereas dense clouds gathered in the sky and caused 
drizzling. Seeing the child born with auspicious Swastik mark on his chest, 
Vasudev recognised Him and prayed Him. At the same time, he and Devaki 
also feared that Kansa would kill their eighth son also. So, they prayed the 
Lord to hide His divine appearance. Lord assured them that their ordeals 
would end soon. 
Then Vasudev put the child in a winnower and started his journey on foot to 
Gokul carrying the winnower on his head. Because of the influence of 
Yogamaya, all the guards fell asleep while the gates of the prison opened 
automatically. It was raining heavily at that time. So when Vasudev reached in 
the open, Sheshnag spread its hood over him to shade the Lord from rain. In 
Gokul, Nand's wife Yashoda too gave birth to a girl child but because of 
Yogamaya's influence she did not know anything about the birth. Vasudev 

218 
 



arrived there and putting Lord beside the sleeping Yashoda, he took her baby 
and returned to his prison in Mathura. 
As soon as the baby reached in the prison, she began to cry loudly. Her cries 
awakened the guards who ran to inform Kansa about the child's birth. Kansa 
at once arrived there and snatching the baby from Devaki's lap, he dashed her 
on the wall. But before he could throw the baby, she slipped from his grip and 
taking eight armed Jagdamba's appearance, established in the air. Laughing 
loudly then, mother Jagdamba said- "O Kansa! You cannot kill me. Your killer 
has taken birth. Lord Hari had been your death in your previous births. In this 
birth also He will kill you. So from now on, make efforts for your benefit only. 
Saying this Jagdamba vanished. 
Worried by the words of Yogamaya, Kansa called a meeting of his prominent 
demons and said - "These evil Gods have hatched a conspiracy to kill me. But 
being a brave man, I do not take these Gods into account. You have yourself 
witnessed how Indra fled before the shower of my arrows. 
You would also remember how the clouds rained heavily in my kingdom when 
Indra had forbidden them from raining on a kingdom and I had pierced them 
with my arrows. 
All the things on earth except my father-in-law Jarasandh bow before me in 
fear. I don't care for the Gods. Even their efforts to kill me make me laugh. But 
still I must not take the word of Jagdamba lightly that my killer had taken 
birth. We should therefore kill all the children who have taken birth within the 
past few days." Instructing the demons Kansa approached Vasudev and Devaki 
in the prison and released them apologising his cruel action in the way of 
killing their innocent children.  
CHAPTER FIVE  
KILLING OF PUTANA AND OF OTHER DEMONS  
When Vasudev was released from the prison, Nand visited Mathura on some 
official trip. He also came to see Vasudev. Vasudev greeted him for the birth 
of a son and instructed him to return to Gokul as soon as possible. He also 

219 
 



requested Nand to look after the son of Rohini as his own son. After meeting 
Vasudev when Nand was returning, many kinds of thoughts were disturbing 
him. In the Gokul while Nand was away, an ogress Putana had stolen the little 
Krishna in the night and was breast-feeding him with her poisoned milk. But 
little Krishna sucked even her life through her breast. Making a loud noise and 
assuming a huge body, Putana fell on earth and died. Only then the village folk 
came to know about the incident. They also saw little Krishna sitting in the lap 
of Putana. 
The frightened Yashoda swept little Krishna with the tail of a cow to do away 
with all the bad omens. The other cowherds also prayed Lord Vishnu to 
protect the child from all calamities. 
KILLING OF SHAKA  
When Lord Krishna was twenty-seven days old, a festival was organised in 
Gokul. Mata Yashoda bathed the baby while the Brahmins recited hymns. 
Yashoda saw that baby was feeling sleepy, so putting him in a cradle, she left 
it under a cart. The cart was loaded with pitchers of milk, curd and butter. 
After sometime, Lord Krishna awoke and began to cry for a feed. But amidst 
festivities, Yashoda could not hear his cries. 
Meanwhile a demon Shakatasur rode the cart wishing to press the cart and 
thereby kill the Lord. But before he could act, the Lord touched the cart with 
His feet and lo and behold! The cart turned over and all the utensils kept on it 
came crashing down. Even the demon was crushed to death under the cart. 
Other boys, who were playing nearby, informed the Gopis (ladiesfolk) that the 
little Kanhaiya had turned over the loaded cart, but they did not believe the 
kids. Yashoda ran in horror and lifted the baby in her lap. 
The Brahmins recited pacifying hymns then. Thereafter the baby was bathed 
again with sanctified water. 
A feast of Brahmins followed then. Ultimately they were seen off with many 
gifts. 
SALVATION OF TRINAVART  

220 
 



Once Mata Yashoda was playing with the baby Lord in her home. All of a 
sudden she felt as if the baby was getting disproportionately heavy. Soon, she 
felt herself unable to bear the child anymore. So she left the child on the 
ground and began to pray Purushaottam Lord Rama. Soon afterwards she 
forgot about the event, but all was not over yet. Trinavart, a demon minister 
of Kansa, had arrived in Gokul as a fierce cyclone. He covered entire Gokul 
with dust and blinded the people temporarily. For a moment people could not 
see anything and during that moment Trinavart blew the baby in air with him. 
When the dust settled, Yashoda did not find the baby Krishna where she had 
left him. She felt extremely sorry and fell on ground in depression. Other 
womenfolk also gathered round her. They too began to cry not seeing baby 
Krishna there. 
In the form of cyclone, the demon Trinavart had blown baby Krishna with him; 
but he too could not bear his heavy burden. So he began to lose his velocity. 
Lord Krishna caught him by neck. 
The demon died in a few moments and his dead body fell in Vraj. And Yashoda 
got a new lease of life when she saw baby Krishna safe and sound. Nand and 
other Gopas too were overjoyed. 
NAMING OF LORD KRISHNA  
Once, the supreme ascetic Gargacharya arrived in Gokul. He was the ancestral 
teacher of Yaduvanshis. Nand joyfully welcomed and treated the hermit. Then 
he requested him to carry out the ritual of naming and suggest suitable 
named for both of his sons. Acharya Garg said, "O Nand, everyone knows that 
I am the ancestral teacher of the Yadavas. If I carry out the naming ritual for 
these boys, people will understand that they are Devaki's sons." So Nand 
requested Gargacharya to name his sons secretly. Gargacharya accepted his 
request and carried out the naming rituals secretly in Nand's cattle shed. 
Garg said: "This son of Rohini will cause by his virtue, great pleasures for his 
near and dear ones. So his second name will be Rama. And because of 
excessive strength, people will call him as Bala also. Since he will unite the 

221 
 



people also, so one of his names would be Sankarshan." Thereafter, Garg said 
pointing to Yashoda-nandan. He has taken incarnation in every age. In the 
past ages, he had taken white, red and yellow complexions respectively. This 
time he has taken dark complexion, so he will be known as Krishna.  
Once he has been the son of Vasudev, so people will call him as Vasudev also. 
He will cause salvation of all of you, and great joy for the fellow Gopas and 
cows. With his help, you will overcome even the severe crises. O Nand, This 
boy will be equal to Narayana in virtues, wealth, beauty, fame and influence. 
Foster this child with care and earnestness." Thus naming the boys as per their 
virtues, Garg returned to his hermitage. 
CHILDHOOD OF LORD KRISHNA  
The time passed in Gokul as usual. Balarama and Krishna too grew normally. 
Soon they began to walk on knees and palms. With their childish plays they 
both amused men and women folk of Gokul. Everyone took special care of 
them and looked after them to save them from any possible danger. Ladysfolk 
were especially careful about them. 
Soon afterwards, both the kids began to walk trottingly. Now their movement 
no longer confined within the boundary of their home. Because of his special 
virtues, Krishna began to lead other kids of his age group whereas his elder 
brother Balarama was somewhat serious in nature. 
Krishna specially enjoyed teasing the girls and milkmaids of Gokul. Often he 
would eat stealing their milk, curd and butter. At other times, He did not 
hesitate even to break their pitchers. In such situations the ladyfolk used to 
gather in Nand's home to complain against Krishna. And every time Yashoda 
promised them to punish Krishna. But every time, when she proceeded to 
punish him, she forgot everything before his sweet, innocent smile. 
One day, Balarama complained against Krishna, "Ma, the little Kanhaiya has 
eaten mud. 
Worried about Krishna's health, Yashoda scolded at him: "Tell me, O 
mischievous Krishna, why did you eat mud". At that moment, little Krishna's 

222 
 



eyes were moving with fear. He made an excuse: "No Ma, I have not eaten 
any mud. They are telling you a lie. If you don't believe, me see yourself." 
Saying this, Krishna opened his little mouth. Yashoda peeped into his mouth 
and what she saw there amazed her. She could not believe it. The entire 
universe was visible in his little mouth. Yashoda saw strange places, entire Vraj 
and even herself in the little mouth of Krishna. She felt dizzy. With his 
illusionary powers, Lord wiped out the memory of this incidence from the 
mind of Yashoda, and she again immersed in love with her child. 
UKHAL BANDHAN AND SALVATION OF YAMALARJUNA  
Once, wishing to feed Krishna with butter, Yashoda began to churn milk in the 
morning. Very soon, Krishna too awakened and not finding the mother on her 
bed, He set out to search her. 
Soon He found her in the courtyard where she was churning the milk. He 
began to insist for breast feeding at once. So Yashoda stopped churning and 
began to breast feed Krishna. Affection played on her face. Suddenly the milk 
kept on the fire pot began to boil. Yashoda left Krishna in order to attend the 
boiling milk. But the unstiated Krishna filled with anger and broke the pitcher 
of curd. Then he went inside and began to eat butter, when Yashoda came 
back; she understood the matter and began to search him with a stick in her 
hand. After eating butter himself, Krishna was now feeding the monkeys with 
it. Seeing the mother come in hot pursuit, Krishna jumped over the mortar 
and ran away. Yashoda chased him, but soon felt tired because of her bulky 
body. 
Thereafter, Yashoda proceeded to tie Krishna as a punishment. She got a rope 
and tried to tie Krishna. But the rope fell short by two fingers. She joined 
many ropes together but the result was same. Every time the ropes fell short 
by two fingers. Soon, Yashoda was bathing in sweat. When Krishna saw his 
mother in depression, he himself tied in the ropes. Tethering little Krishna to a 
heavy mortar, Yashoda engaged in usual household tasks. Tethered to the 
mortar, Krishna glanced at the two Arjuna trees, which were standing on the 
gate like two sentries. He resolved to save them. 

223 
 



Maitreya asked Parashar about the trees. Parashar said: "The Lord of wealth 
Kubera had two sons Nalkubar and Manigreev. One day they were enjoying 
the sweet company of pretty women on the bank of Mandakini River. Just by 
coincidence, Devarshi Narada arrived there. Out of Shyness, the women folk 
at once covered themselves, but both the sons of Kubera stood boldly without 
feeling any shame. Indignant Narada cursed them to become trees and stay in 
that form for one hundred years. Narada showed kindness as well that despite 
being in tree forms, they would have the memory of God alive and would be 
saved by Lord Sri Krishna. Thus, to keep the words of his supreme devotee 
Narada, Lord dragged the mortar to the two Arjuna trees. He walked in such a 
way that the mortar got stuck between the trees. Krishna then pulled the 
mortar and in no time the trees were uprooted. Two divine men appeared 
from the uprooted trees and bowed at the feet of Krishna and prayed him 
with pure hearts. Then they departed to their heavenly abode. 
MIGRATION TO VRINDAVANA  
The uprooted Arjuna trees fell with thundering sound. All the people shivered 
with fear and felt as if lightning had struck somewhere. All the elders including 
Nand met together and discussed the matter. Unanimously they concluded 
that, of late disturbance had increased in Gokul and the circumstances were 
no longer conducive to raise the kids like Balarama and Krishna there. So they 
unanimously decided to leave Gokul and migrate to a verdant place named 
Vrindavana. In their opinion, Vrindavana had ample vegetation and fertility to 
support them and their cattle. 
Thus, on an auspicious day, the entire population of Gokul set out for 
Vrindavana. They packed their households on bullock carts and drove their 
cattle in herds and started in convoy. In Vrindavana they built their houses 
and started their life once again. 
Parashar says: "The verdant environment of Vrindavana, Govardhan mountain 
and crystal clear waters and sandy banks of Yamuna river together filled the 
hearts of Balarama and Krishna with joy. Along with the fellow cowherds, they 
began diverse kinds of plays there. 

224 
 



SALVATION OF VATSASUR  
One day, Balarama and Krishna were grazing their cattle on the bank of 
Yamuna River. A demon, meanwhile, took the guise of a calf and mixed with 
the herd. Obviously, he had malicious intentions. Lord Krishna had already 
seen the demon taking calf's guise and mixing up with the herd. He signalled 
Balarama and they together reached near the calf. The calf appeared 
particularly healthy, so Krishna and Balarama mockingly saw it with admiring 
eyes. Suddenly they held the calf with its hind legs and tail twirling it in air 
they threw it in the sky. When the demon died, they threw him on a Kath 
(wood-apple) tree. 
SALVATION OF BAKASUR  
One day, all the cowherds took their cattle to a large pond to let them drink 
water. There they say a huge creature sitting like a hillock on the bank. They 
were frightened by its appearance. The creature was in fact a demon named 
Bakasur who had arrived there in the guise of a storke. He was himself very 
strong and had a long pointed bill. As soon as the cowherds drew near him, 
The storke hastily picked up Krishna and swallowed him. Other cowherds 
including Balarama were stupefied. They could not believe their eyes. But 
inside the beak, Lord Krishna made him extremely hot and caused severe 
burning in demon's throat. So the demon could not swallow Krishna and 
regurgitated him, and began to hit him with his strong beak. But Lord held his 
beak with both his hands and tore the demon's mouth apart. And as son as 
the demon died, a ripple of joy surged among the cowherds. 
SALVATION OF AGHASUR  
One day, Krishna planned a picnic near Nandanvan. So rising early in the 
morning, He awakened his fellow cowherds sounding a horn. Together, all the 
cowherds, and their cattle went to the forest. There, on the bank of Yamuna 
River they began to play joyfully. Nandanvan was in fact an abode of the 
demon Aghasur. Kansa had sent him there. Seeing the boys playing, he felt 
extremely jealous. Knowing that Krishna had killed his brother Bakasur and 

225 
 



sister Pootana, it seemed an ideal moment for the demon to avenge the death 
of his siblings. Thinking thus, the demon took guise of python and lay in the 
way and opening his mouth like an opening of a cave. 
The cowherds too fell in his trap. Thus driven by curiosity, all the cowherds 
entered the demon mouth one by one. When Lord Krishna saw that his friends 
had entered demon's mouth. He too entered it to protect them. 
Aghasur wanted to masticate the cowherds including Lord Krishna; but the 
Lord increased his body and choked demon throat. Now the breath of demon 
stopped. His eyes rolled over and at last his life left his body through 
Brahmrandhra (cosmic pore). With his ambrosial eye, Lord resurrected these 
dead fellows and their cattle and together they came out of the demon's 
mouth. 
As soon as the demon died, a divine flame emerged from the python's mouth. 
It waited there sometime for God. And when Lord Krishna came out, the flame 
mingled with him. 
ATTACHMENT OF BRAHMA, STEALING OF CATTLE AND COWHERDS  
Parashar says: The cowherds told the tale of Aghasur's salvation to their 
parents only after a year of the incidence. During that period of one year, Lord 
Krishna multiplied himself and took the guise of his fellow cowherd and their 
stock of cattle to remove the illusion of Brahma, who was the cause of the 
following incidence. 
After Aghasur's life mingled with God, Lord Krishna came with His fellow 
cowherd on the bank of Yamuna. They left their cattle to graze freely and they 
sat together to take their lunch. All of the cowherds tasted one-another's 
food, as they wanted to feed Krishna with the tasty food. 
Meanwhile surprised by Aghasur's salvation, Brahma too had arrived there 
and saw Krishna eating food defiled by the cowherds. With that sight, Brahma 
grew suspicious if Krishna was indeed an incarnation of lord. Thus driven by 
the illusion and to test the authenticity of lord's incarnation, Brahma 
kidnapped all the cattle first and when Krishna went out to search the cattle 

226 
 



Brahma kidnapped and concealed the cowherds also. Soon Lord Krishna 
understood the craftiness of Brahma, so he multiplied himself into his fellow 
cowherds and cattle. Replicas resembled truly to the cowherds in appearance, 
complexion, nature, activities, voice, sticks and even in costumes. The replicas 
remain in existence for complete one year. 
Back there, when Brahma returned after hiding the cowherds and the cattle, 
he was stunned to see the cowherds and cattle as usual. Brahma was feeling 
dizzy when Lord bestowed his grace on him. Brahma saw Narayana in every 
dust particle. Brahma therefore bowed his head at the feet of Lord and said: 
"O lord, I submit before you. You can be won only with devotion and not by 
ego. No one can know your omnipresent appearance. Thus praying and 
worshipping Lord Narayana, Brahma returned to his abode. The cowherds 
remained separated from God for one year. But they felt as if only half a 
second had passed because of the illusionary influence of God. That is why 
they related the incidence of Aghasur's killing to their parents only after a year 
it took place. 
SALVATION OF DHENUKASUR  
When Krishna and Balarama entered sixth year of their ages, they got the 
permission to take the cattle out for grazing. Along with their fellow cowherds 
the two brothers too began to take their cattle to Vrindavana. Thus they 
sanctified the earth of Vrindavana with their pious feet. Seeing the beauty of 
Vrindavana, with beautiful, colourful flowers and sweet fruits, Lord Krishna 
felt overjoyed. He then used to graze his cattle at the foothills of Govardhan 
and on the banks of Yamuna River. Playing flute was his favourite pass time. 
One day Krishna's beloved friend Sudama said: "Kanhaiya, there is a beautiful 
forest name Talvana. It has uncountable numbers of trees laden with ripe 
fruits. But a formidable demon Dhenukasur guards that forest. He is very 
strong. So no one goes there; even animals and birds shun that place. But we 
are tempted to eat those sweet delicious fruits. If you and Dau (Balarama) 
wish, we may go there and eat those delicious fruits." Thus hearing this, 
Krishna and Balarama guided all of them to Talvana. There they shook the 

227 
 



trees and in no time a heap of ripe, delicious fruits gathered under the trees. 
All the cowherds began to eat fruits. While eating, they were also making lot 
of noises. Disturbed by the sound of fruits falling and noise of the cowherds, 
the demon Dhenukasur arrived there as a donkey. He was braying loudly and 
tried to hit Balarama, but Balarama caught him by his hind legs and threw him 
in the air. The demon died in an instance. Since that day, everyone visited 
Talvana fearlessly and the cattle grazed there freely. 
GRACE ON KALIYA THE NAGA  
One day, Bala-Krishna arrived on the banks of Yamuna with their friends. 
Balarama was not with them that day. The water of the river Yamuna was 
intoxicated by the poison of Kaliya- the Naga. It was exceptionally hot that day 
and all the cowherds and cattle were very thirsty. So without giving any 
thought, they all drank the water from Yamuna and died. But Lord Krishna 
resurrected them by his ambrosial sight. 
Then Lord Krishna decided to purify the waters of Yamuna. Thus tying a cloth 
round his waist, Krishna climbed a Cadamba tree and jumped into the river. In 
the water the Lord started playing and splashing water. Soon the waves began 
to rise high. When Kaliya- the Naga heard the noise. 
He got extremely angry and appeared before Krishna. 
He saw a beautiful, tender, dark complexioned boy playing joyfully in the 
waters. He stung him and tied him in his spirals. Tied in the spirals of Kaliya, 
Lord became absolutely motionless. 
Seeing Krishna in death like situation, all the cowherds and even the cows felt 
very sorry. Just then Lord freed himself from the hold of Kaliya. Then a game 
of hide and seek began between them. Lord dodged the Naga for a long time. 
Thereafter he rode on Kaliya's hood and began to dance there. 
The followers of God, like Gandharvas etc. began to play Mridang, Dhol etc. to 
give him a company. Tired from the blows of lord's feet, Kaliya soon began to 
vomit blood. Naga's wives began to pray God, "O lord, your incarnation is to 

228 
 



punish the evil ones for their sins. You have shown your grace on us also. We 
are fortunate to have a sight and touch of your feet. Pity O lord. 
This Naga can no longer bear your momentum. He will die. We are all your 
slaves. Kaliya is our lord. Kindly forgive him." With kindness, Lord released 
Kaliya, who prayed thus: O Lord in your creation we snakes represent 
Tamoguna (dark virtues). We are confused by your illusions." Lord dictated 
Kaliya to migrate with his family to Ramanakdweep. Since then water of 
Yamuna became pure for humans and animals. 
DRINKING OF DAVANAL (FOREST FIRE)  
After defeating Kaliya, Lord Krishna and all other people of Vraj felt extremely 
tired. They were very hungry and thirsty also. So they did not go back to 
Vrindavana, but stayed on the bank of Yamuna in the night. Because of 
intense heat of summer, surrounding forests had been Srivelled. 
At midnight those Srivelled forests caught fire and the sleeping people were 
engulfed by it. They awakened startled and took shelter at Krishna. Seeing 
their horrified appearance, Lord Krishna drank the infernal forest fire and thus 
saved the lives of innocent people who had rested their lives at him with faith. 
SALVATION OF PRALAMBASUR  
One day, Balarama and Krishna were playfully grazing their cattle along with 
other cowherds in the forests. When a demon Pralamb arrived there with an 
intention of kidnapping Krishna and Balarama. The demon had come in the 
guise of a cowherd, but the God easily recognised him. 
They accepted his proposal of friendship, but were thinking about the way for 
his salvation. God thereafter summoned all his friends and said: "Pals, today 
we shall divide ourselves in to two teams and play joyfully. Thus the teams 
were divided and each team chose Krishna and Balarama as its captain 
respectively. It was stipulated that the members of defeated team would carry 
the members of winner team on their back up to the place pointed by them. 
Thus the game began and soon both the teams reached a secluded place. 

229 
 



At one time, the team headed by Balarama won. So the members of Krishna's 
team were to carry them on their back. Demon Pralambasur offered Balarama 
a ride on his back. Balarama agreed to ride on the demon's back; but as soon 
as he rode on the demon's back, the demon galloped. But he could not go far 
for not being able to bear Balarama's weight. Them the demon regained his 
huge formidable size and tried to escape by flying. First Balarama felt 
terrorised but soon he realised his real powers and hit on the demon's head 
with a powerful fist. The blow shattered demon's head and he fell on earth 
dead like a huge mountain. 
Parashar says: "Most of the time of Lord Krishna's boyhood passed in 
Vrindavana. There He grazed cattle and played flute. His flute had a divine, 
enchanting sound. The Gopis used to gather around Him drawn by the 
enchanting tunes." They also heard the enchanting Venugeet that fills one 
hearts with the memory of Bhagvat. One of the girls said to her friend: "O dear 
friend, having the privilege of seeing Lords beauty and receiving His kindness 
is the real salvation. Another girl said: "O friend, what penance this flute had 
observed that it has got a closer contact with lips of Nandnandan (an epithet 
for Krishna). 
Even the siblings of this flute, trees and other vegetation's are pleased with its 
fortune and are hence showering their leaves and flowers on him." One more 
said: "O friend, look, even Bhagvati Lakshmi has left her luxurious abode in 
Vaikunth and arrived in Vrindavana to have a look of Lord Devakinandan." A 
Gopi expressed her jealousy: "Even this doe is better than us, O friends, look 
how engrossed is she looking at God that her eyes are not blinking." Hearing 
the sweet enchanting tunes of flute even the heavenly elves gather in the sky 
over Vrindavana. They also see the beauty of Lord Krishna and showered the 
flowers of their braids on him. Even the cows forgot grazing when then heard 
the enchanting music of flute. The calves too forgot drinking milk and began 
to look at Lord Krishna with joy. This is the real devotion for Lord Krishna. You 
have to forget yourself in order to find him. Condition of girls of Vrindavana 
was exactly the same. After having the sight of Lord Krishna they remembered 

230 
 



nothing; not even the way back to home. They stood in the forests in a trance, 
completely tired, unaware of their self. 
A girl said pointing to the fauna: "Look O friends, look at these birds. Do you 
know that these birds were the saints and sages in their previous births. In this 
birth also they are sitting in a state of trance. Look they have forgotten their 
knowledge hearing the sweet enchanting music of the flute. And look at 
Yamuna. She is also unable to contain her exhilaration. She is eagerly 
splashing her waves to wash Lord's feet. Yet another girl said: "Look friends 
the clouds cannot see their Lord scorching in the sun. So they have covered 
the sun and shaded Lord Krishna. Now they are drizzling as if showering 
petals." A girl said: "Friends, look, these Bheelanis are better than us. They 
have such a strong urge of Krishna's sight that when Govind returns home, 
they smear their body with dusts of his feet. Blessed is this mountain which 
has dedicated its entire self in the feet of Brajnandan and feels overjoyed. It is 
his supreme devotee. Kanhaiya has infused even non-living things with life by 
his sweet tunes of flute. 
STEALING OF CLOTHES  
The unmarried girls of Vrindavana felt as if their lives were dedicated to Lord 
Krishna. Each of them wished heartily to have Lord Krishna as her husband. So 
in order to get their desire fulfilled, all of the spinster girls of Vraj began to 
take bath in Yamuna early in morning of Hemant season and worshipped 
Goddess Katyayani. When Madan Mohan learned that the unmarried girls 
wished to marry him. He went to see them at dawn. The girls were bathing 
naked in the river; their clothes were kept on the bank. Lord Krishna stealthy 
took those clothes and climbed on a Kadamba tree. Lord had not stolen their 
clothes with malicious intentions. He had stolen them to remove their flaws 
and make them realise their real appearance that they were not mere girls, 
but pure souls. Without realisation of the real self, one can not experience the 
God. 
The girls were, in fact, the hymns of Vedas, Sadhana, Siddhis, Sages and 
Brahmvidyas (Vedas) themselves that took the guise of girls to enjoy the 

231 
 



vicinity of God. God removed their clothes that symbolised lust. Because of 
the lords grace they all were able to enjoy God's company. 
Parashar says: "O Maitreya, Thus Lord Krishna removed the shyness of the 
girls of Vraj through His sweet talks. He derided at them, made them dance 
like puppets and even stole their clothes when they were bathing naked, but 
they did not deter his actions. Instead they felt overjoyed by the close 
presence of their beloved Kanha."  
LIFTING OF GOVARDHAN  
Parashar says: One day, Balarama and Krishna saw that many delicious kind of 
sweetmeats were being cooked at home. With curiosity and politeness, they 
asked Nand and other elders: "Father, which festival are you preparing for? 
Which God will be worshipped? What purpose will such worship serve? Nand 
Baba explained: "Sons Devraj Indra is the God of clouds. It is because of 
Indra's grace that we get rain. So these materials are being prepared to 
worship Indra. 
Krishna said: Father every creature in the world enjoys comforts or suffers as 
per his fate. None of the Gods can change the results. Action is primary in the 
world. One gets the results as per his actions. Even Indra is God as a result of 
his action. Anyone, who performs one hundred Ashvamegh Yagyas, becomes 
Indra. But even after performing crores of Ashvamegh Yagyas one can not stay 
in Vraj. It is the duty of Indra to cause rain. So it will rain even if you don't 
worship Indra. But to feed the poors and satisfy them with clothes and other 
gifts is real worship. 
By their blessing, we shall be happier. I desire that with all these materials we 
should worship Giriraj Govardhan and distribute the Prasad among the poors. 
With which their souls will be sated and will have the grace of God. 
Thus Lord Krishna told his father that all the people should worship unitedly 
and unitedly they should receive Prasad. If you are ready to do as per my 
desire, its all right, otherwise I will not worship your haughty God, nor receive 
his Prasad. 

232 
 



WORSHIP OF GOVARDHAN AND INDIGNATION OF INDRA  
Thus convinced by Kanhaiya's wise reasoning, all the Gopas agreed to him. 
Nand Baba said, "O Krishna, we are making all these preparation for you only 
and we will do as you say. We will worship Govardhan. For us Govardhan is 
also like a God. It gives us grass, water, and fuel etc., which are necessary for 
our lives. Thus with lord's consent, they dropped their plan to worship Indra 
and resolved to worship Govardhan faithfully. 
On the Purnima (full moon) day in the month of Kartik (November) all the 
Gopas (people of Vraj region) gathered near mount Govardhan. During the 
night all of them circumambulated the mountain. Lord invoked the Ganges by 
his wish and bathed Govardhan with her water. Then they put vermilion on it, 
offered basil-leaves, flowers etc and worshipped it. Brahmins recited hymns in 
its praise. To make the people believe in their rituals, Lord Krishna himself 
appeared on the mountain in huge form and exclaimed: "I am Giriraj (the king 
of the mountain) and began to eat the offerings. But as a child, He was still 
among the villagers who faithfully bowed before the mountain. Among them, 
the child Krishna said: "look, what a surprise Giriraj has appeared himself and 
bestowed his grace on us. He has accepted our worship." There after all the 
Gopas distributed Prasad among themselves and felt supremely satisfied. 
When Indra learned that the Gopas had stopped worshipping him, he grew 
outrageous. In anger, he ordered the clouds to rain torrentially over Vraj and 
cause heavy flood in Vraj region. In no time dense clouds gathered over Vraj. 
Soon there was lightning, thunder, darkness and storm all around. Then it 
began to rain torrentially. All the people took refuge at Lord Krishna and 
prayed him to save them from the anger of Indra. Lord Krishna said: "Those 
who regard me as their, are mine and I am theirs, So there is no need to worry 
for you."Saying this, Lord lifted Giriraj on his little finger and called all the 
people of Vraj along with their cattle under the lee of Govardhan. Then he 
ordered his wheel Sudarshan to absorb the water of the clouds so that not 
even a single drop could fall on earth. Thus for seven days continuously Lord 
balanced Govardhan on the little finger. Thus Lord Krishna also came to be 

233 
 



known as Giridhari. People who had gathered around him, just kept on seeing 
Lords moon-like face and hence did not feel thirsty or hungry. In fact the 
comforts those people got during those seven days are beyond verbal 
description. Lord held Govardhan on one hand, and conch in the other, while 
with the remaining two hands He began to play this flute. Hearing the tunes of 
his flute, all the people of Vraj began to dance with joy. After the rains 
stopped, all of them returned to their homes. 
When Indra learned about the happenings in Vraj, he soon realised his 
mistake. Indra himself reached Vraj and begged Lord for His pardon. Then he 
gave Lord a ceremonial bath with the milk of Surabhi. For protecting the cows, 
the Lord also got one more name "Govind". 
RASS LEELA  
Parashar related to Maitreya the tale of Kamadev's humiliation. The purpose 
of describing this tale is just that common people should reflect on the selfless 
love of Gopis for Lord Krishna and experience the love of God for them as 
well. 
After conquering Brahma and other Gods, ego of Kamadev had surged to 
great heights. He, therefore, requested God to quench his thirst for war. God 
invited Kamadev to visit Vrindavana on the night of Sharad Purnima (Full 
moon night) in the season that precedes winter, and told him that on that 
divine night He would enjoy the company of crores of Gopis. "If I have 
slightest passion for any of them, you will win, otherwise you will lose." That 
night Lord Krishna added more divinity, more brilliance to it with a resolution 
of Ras with the help of Yogmaya (personified illusion). It was a perfect night 
for the purpose - flowers bloomed in Vrindavana, full moon shone, and gentle, 
cool breeze blew from the banks of river Yamuna. Amidst this stimulating 
ambience Lord Krishna began to play an enchanting tune on his flute. The 
tune attracted Gopis, their passion surged to its zenith and under the 
influence of love for Lord Krishna and as if in trance, all of them ran to meet 
their beloved Kanhaiya leaving all their fear, bondage, patience and shyness 
behind. Some of them were intercepted by their husbands and dragged back 

234 
 



to home. But only their physical bodies stayed put, their souls reached 
Vrindavana. 
In Vrindavana on the bank of Yamuna, Gopis saw Vrindavana Vihari (epithet 
for Krishna) near their familiar Cadamba tree. Yogmaya adorned all the Gopis 
from tip to toe. In fact those Gopis were not ordinary women. 
Maitreya asks: "Gopis had not regarded Krishna as Parabrahma. What was the 
basis for their passion then?"Parashar says: When a wretched person like 
Shishupal, who always abused Lord Krishna could find supreme position, there 
should be no doubt for Gopis who had such a profound passion for Lord." So 
Gopis arrived and gathered around Lord Krishna. 
To test their devotion and to enhance the honor of Kamadev, Krishna said to 
them: "O Gopis, the pure ones, it is not fit for you to stay here at this hour of 
night. Go and serve your husbands. 
Your duties must be first to your husband's children and cows. They will be 
waiting for you eagerly. Go and console them. You can gain me by hearing, 
reciting, seeing etc. You need not sit here. Go to your homes." Gopis, however 
said: "Govind, we have come to you leaving all the mundane lusts behind. 
Now going back is like ruining our lives. It is the greatest misfortune if 
someone returns to mundane affairs even after being at your feet." These 
words that reflected divine feelings of Gopis pleased Lord. He began to enjoy 
their company. But a feeling of ego began to creep in the minds of Gopis 
because of lord's closeness. They began to assume themselves as highly 
fortunate. To remove their ego, Lord disappeared right among them. 
PITIABLE CONDITION OF GOPIS IN KRISHNA'S ABSENCE  
After the disappearance of Krishna, Gopis were perplexed. Their hearts 
burned with desire. They had dedicated their entire selves in the feet of Lord. 
They were entirely merged in the love of Krishna. Thus driven by passion, 
Gopis began to search Lord Krishna. They asked trees, creepers and vegetation 
for the whereabouts of their beloved. They then spotted His footprints at one 
place. Footprints of Radha were also there. 'Indeed He would have carried 

235 
 



her, that great fortunate one, on His shoulders.' They thought. Lord had 
indeed, after disappearing from amidst Gopis, taken Radha to an isolated 
place. She had then began to think herself superior to other Gopis. So at one 
place, she said: "O Lord, I can't walk now. My tender feet are tired. Kindly 
carry me on your shoulders to wherever you wish." At her request, Lord 
Krishna agreed to carry her on his shoulder. But as soon as she proceeded to 
ride, Lord disappeared from there also. 
Now, Radha began to cry and wail and fainted. At the same time, other Gopis 
also reached there and found Radha lying unconscious on the ground. All of 
them including Radha then returned to the bank of Yamuna and began to wait 
for Krishna's appearance. 
RE-APPEARANCE OF LORD KRISHNA AMONG GOPIS  
When the beloved Gopis burst into tears, Krishna's patience gave away. His 
heart melted at their condition and He appeared amidst them. A sweet smile 
played on his beautiful face. He wore a garland of fresh Vaijayanti flowers and 
yellow clothes. His beauty could have moved even Kamadev. Seeing their 
beloved Kanha once again amidst them, Gopis got a new lease of life. All of 
them began to embrace Lord Krishna and thus quench the fire of separation 
that was burning their bodies. 
Thereafter, along with the beauties of Vraj, Lord Krishna came to the bank of 
Yamuna. Gopis put their queries before him for solution. Lord Krishna said: "O 
beloved Gopis, I do not reciprocate to the desire of my beloved ones for 
physical love. Because of it their conscience remains always engrossed in me. 
Hence, I take to hiding even after meeting so that you could feel complete 
imbibement in me. 
MAHARAS  
From the words of Lord Krishna, Gopis forgot the pains of separation. From 
the closeness of their beloved, their lives were successful now. With those 
Gopis, Lord Krishna started Maharas on the pious banks of river Yamuna. All 
the Gods gathered in sky to witness that divine festival. 

236 
 



Gopis were even more fortunate than Lakshmi. But even amidst crores of 
Gopis, who were eager to devote their everything to Him, Lord Krishna 
completely refrained from desires, feelings and even actions. Thus Lord 
Krishna defeated even Kamadev and removed his ego. 
SALVATION OF SUDARSHAN AND SHANKHCUR  
Parashar says:  
Once on the occasion of Shivaratri, Nand Baba and all other Gopas drove their 
carts with families and reached Ambikavana on a pilgrimage tour. There they 
took bath in the river Saraswati and with devotion worshiped Lord Shiva and 
Parvati. They also observed day long fast and decided to pass their night on 
the bank of Saraswati. But a huge python inhabited that place. During the 
night the python emerged and caught hold of Nand's leg. Nandbaba cried 
loudly. All the Gopas gathered around him. He cried again: "Kanhaiya, this 
snake is all set to strangulate me. Save me." Lord Krishna touched the python 
with his feet and instantaneously the python vanished. In its place appeared a 
divine-looking human being. He said: "O Lord, I was a Vidyadhar named 
Sudarshan. I was so much obsessed with my beauty, youth, luxury and 
comforts that I used to insult others. One day I had derided at the ugly 
appearance of the sage Angira. So indignantly he cursed me to become a 
python. But, pleased by my realisation of mistake, he had told that when God 
himself would touch me, I would regain my original appearance." Thereafter, 
Sudarshan went round the God, worshiped Him and with his permission, 
departed to his abode. 
On another occasion, Lord Krishna arrived in Vrindavana during Vasant Ritu 
(spring Season). 
There He took part in Vasantik Ras (Ras of spring season) with the Gopis. 
During Ras itself, a demon Shankhchur tried to escape away kidnapping some 
of the Gopis. A stampede resulted among Gopis. Hearing their noise, Lord 
Krishna ran after the demon, carrying a huge Sal (Shorea) tree in his hands. In 
no time He overtook the demon and killed him by just one blow. 

237 
 



He picked up the gem from demon's head and handed it to Balarama. 
SALVATION OF ARISHTASUR  
Once, Kansa sent a demon Arishtasur to Vrindavana. The demon arrived there 
in a bull's guise. 
That huge bull came to Vrindavana and began to terrorise the people with his 
loud sound. Seeing the bull, Balarama said to Krishna: "Kanhaiya, I have never 
seen such a huge bull before." All the people began to cry for help. Lord 
Krishna consoled them and challenged the bull demon: "O fool, why are you 
terrorising these cows and cowherds? I am going to shatter your ego." The 
challenge from Krishna pinched the demon. Tapping his hooves angrily, the 
demon attacked God. He wished to gore Him, but Krishna held his horns and 
pushed him back. Then kicking the demon Krishna killed him in no time. 
KANSA SENDS AKRURA  
After the killing of Arishtasur, Devarshi Narada visited Kansa and asked: "O 
Kansa, the girl who had slipped form your hand was in fact the daughter of 
Yashoda. Krishna and Balarama, who are staying in Vrindavana, are infact the 
sons of Devaki and Rohini respectively. Because of your fear, Vasudev has kept 
them under the supervision of his friend Nand. Those two boys have killed the 
demons sent by you." Hearing these words, Kansa shook with anger and put 
Vasudev and Devaki in prison again. Thereafter he called his minister Akrura 
and asked him to set out at once for Gokul. He said to Akrura: "Akruraji, you 
are an old friend and well-wisher of mine, Go to Gokul and bring the sons of 
Vasudev, who are staying at Nand's home. Invite them to visit Mathura, to 
witness the festivities of Dhanush-Yagya." Akrura understood Kansa's 
intentions, but feared that if he refused, that demon would kill him. So he 
decided to visit Gokul, and also have the opportunity of seeing God. He was 
feeling overwhelmed by the mere thought of it. Next day, he set out on a 
grand chariot to meet his supreme Lord in Gokul. 
Meditating in the feet of Lord, Akrura was heading towards Vrindavana. He 
was feeling himself as the most fortunate one for he was sure to have a sight 

238 
 



of Lord. Thus obsessed with many kinds of devotional feelings, Akrura alighted 
from the chariot at the border of Vrindavana and started walking. He found it 
unjust to ride a chariot on the land of Vrindavana where Lord Krishna treaded. 
By the time, he reached Vrindavana, Lord Krishna and Balarama had returned 
home after grazing their cattle. Seeing them, Akrura fell at their feet. Both the 
brothers raised Akrura and addressed him as "Chacha" (uncle), and escorted 
him into the house. 
Akrura was given a warm welcome and treatment there. After the dinner, 
they assembled in Nand's drawing room. Nand inquired about the reason of 
his sudden arrival. Akrura said: "Kansa is organising a wrestling competition in 
Mathura. He has invited all the big and small kings to the competitions. He has 
invited you with Krishna and Balarama as well. Beautiful Mathura is worth 
seeing. Gullible Nand felt pleased by Akrura's talking and said: "King Kansa has 
shown a great honor to me. He has sent invitation only to other kings, but has 
sent his minister to call me and a golden chariot for my kids." So it was 
announced in Gokul that all the people would go to Mathura the next day and 
witness the festivities there. 
DEPARTURE OF KRISHNA AND BALARAMA FOR MATHURA  
When the Gopis heard about Krishna leaving Gokul to visit Mathura, they 
began to wail and cry. 
They were getting so much restless by the news that, they felt, their lives 
would end before the sunrise. They started imprecating fate that it had no 
kindness. First it provided them with a closer contact with their beloved 
Kanha, now it was causing a long separation from him. Some of Gopis even 
begged for death, they felt it better than living without Kanha. All the Gopis 
kept on crying and wailing nightlong. Mother Yashoda awoke early in the 
morning next day. She churned out butter and adding Misri (sugar candies), 
she took it to Krishna to feed him. But there she found that both Krishna and 
Balarama were getting ready to set out for Mathura. They held mother's feet 
and said: "Pardon us, O mother, we are going to Mathura." These words 
disturbed Yashoda. 

239 
 



She ran and fell at Akrura's feet and said: "I am your slave. 
O Akrura, please do not take my beloved sons to Mathura. They are 
inseparable from my heart. 
Why Kansa has summoned them to Mathura? O Akrura, go and tell him to 
take everything from us, but spare our sons. We are also ready to live in jail, 
but can't lose our beloved sons." Akrura consoled Yashoda. "Bhabhi (sister-in-
law), don't worry. These two brothers are going to Mathura to witness the 
festivities there and will return soon to comfort your heart." Yashoda said: 
"Akruraji, Mathura is a town of gold and both of my sons are too young yet to 
be needed there for any reason." Touching the feet of Nand and Yashoda, 
both the brothers said: "Father, mother, we will definitely return. Presently 
we wish to see the grandeur of Mathura." Meanwhile all the Gopis and Gopas 
had gathered there. Crying and wailing, the Gopis said: "You are very Cruel, O 
Akrura, who named you as Akrura. You have come here to lacerate our 
hearts." Second Gopi said: "No friend, it is not a fault of Akrura. Our 
complaints are with Shyamsundar. We left everything, our husbands, children, 
our homes and dedicated our entire selves in your service. 
And now you are deserting us so ruthlessly. We have no support for our life 
except you, O Madhusadan." Saying this, all the Gopis burst into tears again. 
All the Gopas, including Sridama surrounded the chariot and said: "O Krishna 
we had not even dreamt that you would desert us so ruthlessly. O Kanhaiya 
we have seen with our eyes that even Indra, Varuna, Sanakadi and Brahma 
bow before you. But we have never regarded you as God. 
We regarded you as our friend. Are you angry with us? O my childhood friend 
Kanhaiya, we request you, we will never abuse you in future. If you were 
intending to go, why did you, then save us from the infernal forest fire. Why 
did you save from the deluging rains? We cannot live without you. Tell us O 
benevolent friend, when will you return." Lord Krishna consoled them all and 
took many of them with Him. The chariot began to move. 

240 
 



As long as the flag of the chariot remained visible, people kept on crying and 
wailing. Even the eyes of Akrura filled with tears. Lord asked him: "Kaka, why 
are you weeping?" Akrura replied: "O Lord, Kansa is the great sinner. I feel he 
will try to torment you by all means. So, my heart says, that I should take you 
back to Vrindavana, because if Kansa did any harm to you, their spirits will 
curse me for ever."  
AKRURA HAS A SIGHT OF LORD IN FOUR-ARMED FORM  
Hearing Akrura's words, Lord understood that when he had arrived in Vraj, he 
was afflicted with a feeling of majesty. But now, it has been replaced by 
affection now. He therefore decided to remove his dilemma. Thus, Lord said 
to him: "Kaka, Mathura is still some distance away. So you take a bath in 
Yamuna. We brothers are waiting for you in the chariot."As soon as Akrura 
took a dip in Yamuna, Lord showed him a sight of His abode Vaikunth and his 
Narayana's appearance in which, he was holding conch, wheel, mace and 
lotus in each of his four hands and was lying on the bed of Sheshnaga. With 
folded hands, Akrura prayed to lord: "O lord, you are the reason for the 
existence of Brahma and the Universe. O Lord, I pray at your feet again and 
again. Now I recognise you. You are the one who took the incarnations of 
Matsya, Kachchap, Varaha, Narasinha, Vamana, Rama etc. Thus after bath and 
worship, Akrura returned to the chariot. Lord Krishna understood that now a 
devotional feeling had arisen in the mind of Akrura for Narayana. Lord asked: 
"Your condition seems miserable. Did you see anything extraordinary under 
water?" Akrura said: "O Lord, now bestow your grace on me. Kindly come to 
my home and accept my hospitality."  
ARRIVAL IN MATHURA AND GRACE ON KUBJA 
 After the departure of Akrura, Nandbaba too set out for Mathura along with 
the Gopas. On the way itself, they caught up with Krishna and Balarama. All of 
them then reached Mathura together. There they stayed in a garden. After 
sometime, with Nand's permission, both the brothers set out to see the city of 
Mathura. Mathura was indeed a beautiful town. All the residents of Mathura 
thronged on roads, roofs and attices to have a sight of Krishna and Balarama. 

241 
 



On the way, they met a pretty but hunched woman. She introduced herself as 
Kubja, the maid of Kansa. Her duty was to smear the members of the royal 
family with sandalwood paste. God asked her if she would smear him with 
sandal paste. Kubja said: "O Manmohan, I see no one more fitting than you for 
the sandal paste." Thus she smeared Lord Krishna‘s forehead with saffron. On 
Dau's forehead she smeared musk containing sandal paste, other Gopas 
smeared all the remaining sandal paste on their heads. Lord Krishna then, put 
His feet on Kubja's and holding her chin gave her head a slight jerk. And in no 
time, Kubja's hunch was gone and she turned into a pretty woman. She 
begged Lord for His love. The Lord promised her a meeting in future, and 
proceeded ahead. 
BREAKING OF THE BOW AND KILLING ELEPHANT  
After saving Kubja, Lord Krishna and other Gopas moved ahead. At a place 
they saw a huge bow kept on a high stage. Many strong men were guarding it. 
Lord Krishna entered the canopy and easily lifted the bow and broke it into 
pieces. There was a big applause from all around. Dau said: "Krishna, now the 
crowd will increase here, so let us escape in time. Thus, both the brothers and 
their friends beat a retreat to their camp. There they rested for night. There in 
Mathura, breaking of the bow had frightened Kansa. He could not sleep during 
the night. Even in his dreams, he saw nothing, but Krishna everywhere around 
him. 
Early in the morning, Kansa summoned his minister and ordered him to make 
Kuvalayapeed, the elephant to stand in the center of the main gate. He 
thought that the elephant would kill both the boys if they dared to enter the 
fort through main gate. Back there in the garden, Krishna and Balarama set 
out in wrestlers guise for the fort. At the gate, seein an elephant blocking the 
passage, they asked mahout loudly: "O Mahout, why have you made the 
elephant stand in the center of the gate. Move it either ahead or back." But 
instead of moving the elephant out of the passage, the mahout steered it right 
on them. But before elephant could attack them, Balarama caught its trunk, 
while Krishna caught its tail. Both the brothers then dragged the elephant out 

242 
 



of the gate and lofted it in the air. The elephant fell on the ground with a loud 
thud and died on the spot. 
SALVATION OF WRESTLERS  
Kansa felt very nervous by the news of elephant's killing. Before he could take 
stock of the situation, Lord Krishna and Balarama arrived in the amphi-
theatre. The spectators present in the amphitheatre saw Lord as per their 
feelings. The menfolk saw Lord Krishna as a Jewel among the men. 
Womenfolk saw him as an incarnation of Kamadev. Cowherds saw their 
natural friend in Lord, while to Kansa He appeared as his death. But to his 
mother and father, Devaki and Vasudev and to Nand, Krishna and Balarama 
appeared as small kids. Sages and ascetics saw nothing but metaphysical 
coming in boys' guise. Learned ones sighted His cosmic form while to Yadavas 
He appeared as their tutelary God. As soon as Lord Krishna and Balarama 
arrived in the ring, the wrestlers, who were already present there, stood up 
like springs. A wrestler Chanur dragged Krishna and one named Mushtik 
dragged Balarama into the ring. They said to them: "Both of you and we are 
the subjects of the great king Kansa. It is our duty to please our king with our 
art and skill. More over we will receive many rewards also." Krishna said: "O 
wrestlers, you please fight among yourselves. We are boys yet, so we shall 
witness your fight from a distance." Chanur said: "No you are neither boy nor 
teenagers. You are stronger than the strongest. You have just killed an 
elephant which was stronger than thousand elephants." Thus, both the 
brothers were compelled to wrestle with the royal wrestlers. Balarama beat 
Mushtik on the ground so hard that he died at once on the spot. Krishna 
similarly killed second wrestler Chanur. All the remaining wrestlers met similar 
fate one by one. The massive crowd present there applauded them joyfully. 
SALVATION OF KANSA  
Seeing the shameful defeat of his wrestlers, Kansa infuriated with anger and 
proclaimed: "Tie all the opponents; tie Ugrasen, Devaki, Vasudev and Nand in 
ropes and bring them before me." Lord Krishna could not tolerate this and in a 
single jump, He reached on the stage where Kansa was present. Lord Krishna 

243 
 



caught him by hair and said: "O Kansa, once you have caught a helpless 
woman by hair, I have avenged that insult. Now you will receive the fruits for 
your atrocities." Saying this, Lord began to twirl Kansa catching him by hair, 
and threw him down from the stage. Then Lord jumped once again and landed 
on the chest of Kansa. Kansa died instantaneously. Thus, Kansa who was an 
incarnation of the demon Kalnemi received salvation. 
Lord Krishna then, released his parents from the prison and crowned his 
maternal grand father Ugrasen as the king of Mathura. 
YAGYOPAVIT OF KRISHNA AND BALARAMA 
After the successful completion of all the royal ceremonies, the consecration 
of Krishna and Balarama was carried out. Thereafter, they came to stay at the 
hermitage of sage Sandipani for formal education. Extraordinarily brilliant 
Krishna successfully learned all the knowledge in short period of time. Then, 
as GuruDakshaina (paying respect to the teacher) Krishna brought back his 
dead sons from the abode of Yamaraj. Taking convocation bath, thereafter, 
Lord Krishna returned to Mathura. There, though living among royal luxuries 
and grandeur Lord Krishna remained indifferent. Memory of his sentimental, 
beloved devotees friend and other people of Vraj kept on pricking him. 
SENDING UDDHAVA AS MESSENGER  
Savant Uddhava, the son of Yadava's minister Brihaspati was an intimate 
friend of Lord Krishna. 
Only he had the permission to enter Lord's sanctum. Seeing his friend Krishna 
in remorse, Uddhava asked: "Mathuranath, you seem to be upset. What is 
troubling you?" Lord Krishna replied: "Uddhava, I feel perplexed. I remember 
my days in Vrindavana. Please go to Vrindavana and get the news regarding 
Gopis there. Also give them my message." Thus Lord Krishna donned Uddhava 
in his attire and sent him to Vraj in his chariot. 
There he stayed at Nand's home. At night, Uddhava enquired about Nand and 
Yashoda's well being and about Vraj in general. That whole might passed in 
chatting. 

244 
 



BHRAMAR GEET  
Next day, when the Gopis got the news of Uddhava's arrival, they thronged in 
and around Nand's residence. They recognised the chariot parked in front of 
the gate. It was the same chariot on which Krishna and Balarama had 
departed for Mathura. First they thought that their beloved Krishna had 
returned. 
But someone informed that it was Uddhava, Krishna's Savant friend, who had 
come to preach them about metaphysical knowledge. Soon afterwards, 
Uddhava came out and spoke out loud: "O Gopis, listen to the preaching of 
Uddhava." But instead of listening to him, Gopis covered their ears. Feeling 
insulted, Uddhava expressed his dissatisfaction over their behaviour. Gopis 
said to him: "O gentleman, firstly we are not familiar with you, secondly we 
have no capacity to hear your preaching. Yes if you wish to give us a message 
of our most beloved; thousand of ears are eager to hear that." Uddhava then 
introduced himself as the intimate friend of Lord Krishna. 
Knowing his identity Gopis welcome and treated Uddhava warmly. Uddhava 
then began to say again: "O Gopis, the person, whom you are declaring as 
your beloved friend, in fact recognises no mother, no father and no other 
relation. He has no form, no colour and no body. He is above all, non-existing 
all pervasive and the giver of joy. He is never separate from his devotee and 
beloved ones. All of you, too, feel the presence of that Supreme Being and be 
happy forever." Gopis said: "Uddhava, as long as Ghanashyam stayed with us, 
we saw endless virtues in him. 
But only within six months of his stay in Mathura, you wiped out all of his 
virtues and turned him virtueless.Tell us with which mouth did he eat butter, 
with which hand did he break our pitchers, with which feet did he pasture 
cows in the forests and with which feet did he dance on the hood of Kaliya. 
Was he another Krishna?" Harsh reaction of the Gopis startled Uddhava. He 
began to think where he had been caught. His knowledge of Vedanta was 
proving ineffective on the Gopis who were sunk in so much love. On the other 
hand, Gopis too were feeling embarrassed for treating the guest bitterly. But 

245 
 



they were also not prepared to listen to such preaching that condemned love. 
Moreover, they had let out their long accumulating feeling. 
Meanwhile a bumblebee perched at Radha's feet mistaking them for lotus. 
Pointing to it, all the Gopis said: "Beware O bumblebee, beware if you dare to 
touch the feet of our Radha. It appears that you are a disciple of Krishna. 
There is now no secret regarding the virtues and actions of your friend. But it 
is good that he and you tied in friendship. You are black and your friend has a 
black heart. Virtues of both of you are same. 
First He imbibed us in His love; then left us ruthlessly forever. He is not sorry 
for us. But why does Lakshmi serve in those feet? She must be careful, lest she 
should be deceived like us. O bumblebee you also appear to be a polymath 
who has come here to preach us. But you won't get an audience in Braj. You 
should better go to Mathura. 
There is one Kubja go and relate your tale to her. You will receive ample 
donations from her. 
What will you get from the Gopis here? They have already lost their mental 
balance, because of separation from the beloved Krishna. If you have come to 
ask, why we loved Krishna. O bumblebee, we have no knowledge. But we 
know that our love for Krishna was not a mistake. 
Even the Goddess Lakshmi does not leave His feet for a moment. Why should 
we leave his feet then? But O bumblebee, have you really come to convince 
us. When He could not come out of shame, He sent you to console us - the 
deaf and dumb Gopis. But be careful if you put your head at the feet of Radha. 
Get away, we have already seen enough of flattery and flirtation of your 
friend. Deserting our affection for ephemeral things, we loved that eternal 
one. But He too abandoned us. Can you guess about our condition? Tell us, O 
Uddhava, shall we ever get the sight of Sri Krishna again? Hearing the tragic 
tale of the Gopis, Uddhava too felt very sorry for them. He felt as if 
Mathuranath, Lord Krishna was indeed neglecting those Gopis. Uddhava 
stayed in Vrindavana for six months. There he saw every place, every spot 

246 
 



where Lord Krishna had played once. When he was returning to Mathura, 
mother Yashoda presented him with butter, Radha gave him the flute. Thus 
immersed in the love and overwhelmed by its feelings, Uddhava reached 
Mathura. 
He said to Krishna: "Lord, the real appearance of love, that I saw in Vrindavana 
is the only truth." Sri Krishna said: "Uddhava, You are weeping. Just look at 
me." Uddhava looked at him with wide, opened eyes. In every single hair of 
Lord, there existed Gopis. Uddhava was indeed a Savant. But Lord had sent 
him to Braj only to be taught a lesson of love. 
After the death of Kansa his widowed queens Asti and Prapti returned to their 
father Jarasandh's home and informed him that Krishna and Balarama had 
killed their husband Kansa. Infuriated by the news, Jarasandh at once 
launched a massive attack on Mathura. The people of Mathura were 
frightened by the strength of Jarasandh's army. Lord Krishna too fell in deep 
thought. Just then, divine weapons and chariots appeared from the heaven. 
Both the brothers took the weapons and boarded their chariots. Then they 
fought a fierce battle and slayed all the army of Jarasandh. 
Balarama furiously caught Jarasandh and was about to kill him. But Lord 
Krishna stopped him. 
They then released Jarasandh and let him go unhurt. Jarasandh felt ashamed 
that Krishna released him because of his helpless condition. 
Parashar says: Despite his shameful defeat, Jarasandh attacked Mathura 
seventeen times with huge armies. But every time, the Lord defeated him and 
released him in kindness. And every time Jarasandh felt more humiliated." At 
last, instead of attacking Mathura himself, Jarasandh sent Kalyavan to defeat 
Sri Krishna. 
Kalyavan launched an attack on Mathura with one crore strong Malechchh 
army. This time Lord Krishna decided to vacate Mathura instead of countering 
the attack. He got Dwarkapuri constructed by Vishwakarma and settled all the 
people of Mathura there. Then, unarmed, Lord Krishna walked past Kalyavan. 

247 
 



Pointed by Narada, Kalyavan at once recognised Krishna and gave Him a 
chase. He also challenged Him, but the Lord did not listen to his challenges 
and kept moving with face turned away. Kalyavan chased Him for long, but 
could not catch up. 
Ultimately Lord Krishna entered a cave. Kalyavan too followed Him into the 
cave. In the cave Lord Krishna saw that someone was sleeping there. So He 
covered the man with his yellow length of cloth and himself hid inside the 
cave. Kalyavan too arrived there and saw the sleeping man. He mistook him 
for Krishna and said: "Krishna, you might have thought that braves do not 
attack on sleeping people. So I will first wake you up and then kill you." Saying 
thus Kalyavan kicked the sleeping man hard. However, as soon as the man 
awakened and glanced at Kalyavan, Kalyavan got incinerated at once. 
TALE OF MUCHKUND  
Maitreya asked: "Gurudev, who was that sleeping man?" Parashar says: "O 
king, that sleeping man was Muchkund, the son of the king Mandhata. The 
Gods had sought his assistance in their war against the demon during the 
Satya Yuga. With Muchkund's help, the Gods had defeated the demons and 
thus pleased had asked him to seek a boon. Muchkund then had sought a 
boon of seeing God in tangible form. The Gods had assured him that he would 
have a sight of God in Dwapar Yuga. Since Dwapar Yuga was still far away, so 
Muchkund had asked: "What should I do till then?" The Gods asked him to 
sleep somewhere and blessed him with a boon that whoever waked him up 
would be incinerated at once, by his glance. Thus, in order to get Kalyavan 
incinerated and show Muchkund with his Divine form, Lord had gone to that 
spot where Muchkund was sleeping. 
Muchkund got the sight of God in Chaturbhuj form; and sought a boon of 
continuous devotion for three births. Thus, Lord defeated Malechchh army 
and captured all their wealth. He also defeated Jarasandh and caused great 
joy for the people of Dwarka.The king of Anart, Raivat got his daughter Revati 
married to Balarama with the blessing of Brahma. 

248 
 



MESSAGE OF RUKMANI FOR LORD KRISHNA  
Parashar says: "Bhismak was the king of Vidarbh. He had five sons and a 
daughter Rukmani. 
Rukmi, the eldest son of Bhismak, had fixed his sister's engagement with 
Shishupal, the prince of Chaidi. Narada did not like this development. He went 
to Kundanpur, the capital of Vidarbh and said in the court of Bhismak: O King, 
I am coming from Dwarka." Bhismak said! "O great Sage, I have never heard 
about any city named Dwarka". Thus, in the court of Bhismak, Narada 
narrated about the life of Lord Krishna and the grandeur of Dwarka. Bhismak 
heard the tale with full attention. His daughter Rukmani too enjoyed the tale. 
But Rukmi had a strong opposition against Lord Krishna. Ignoring the wish of 
his father, he was not ready to get his sister married to Lord Krishna. On the 
appointed day, Shishupal appeared there, in a procession, to get married with 
Rukmani. 
But Rukmani was determined to marry Lord Krishna. She sent a love letter to 
Krishna through a loyal Brahmin and declared a fast unto death. Lord Krishna 
read her letter, which said: "O Trilokinath, since the moment, these ears have 
heard about your virtues, actions, character and plays, my soul experiences 
divine peace. O Achyut, my mind is dedicated in your feet. O great among the 
men, this Rukmani has dedicated herself in your feet. Now it is up to you to 
see that no jackal could take away the lion's share." The Brahmin, the carrier 
of the letter, returned to Kundanpur with an assurance from Lord Krishna. 
Lord Krishna too called the charioteer and set out at once for Kundanpur. 
There in Kundanpur, Rukmani after getting the assurance from the Brahmin 
was thus waiting for Lord' Krishna‘s arrival. 
Preparations for Rukmani's marriage with Shishupal were on with full swing in 
Kundanpur. All the houses, streets and lanes were cleaned and sprinkled with 
scented water. All the men and women folk donned new clothes and 
ornaments. King Bhismak worshipped his ancestors and Gods and welcomed 

249 
 



the Brahmins liberally. Extremely beautiful princess Rukmani was given 
ceremonial bath and donned with auspicious clothes and bracelets. 
The king of Chedi, Damaghosh got the auspicious rites for the marriage of his 
son Shishupal, performed by Brahmins. All the Baratis (people in marriage 
procession) were given grand reception. Many great kings like Shalv, 
Jarasandh, Dantvaktra, Vidurath and Paundrak were present in the marriage 
procession. They had come with their armies with an intention of fighting 
Krishna and Balarama. After Krishna's departure, Balarama too set out for 
Kundanpur with chaturangini (with four wings) army, for he had known about 
their opponents' preparedness. 
Rukmani was eagerly awaiting Lord Krishna‘s arrival. She had received the 
news that Dwarakanath (Krishna) had resolved to take her away. She was 
feeling overwhelmed in her heart. Seeing Lord Krishna arrived intently in the 
marriage ceremonies of his daughter, king Bhismak welcomed him. Seeing 
him, even the common people of Vidarbh prayed "May our princess Rukmani 
get Sri Krishna as her husband. At the same time, Rukmani emerged from her 
palace to go to the temple of Ambikadevi, soldiers were guarding her. In the 
temple, Rukmani prayed peacefully: "O Mother Ambika I greet you and 
Ganapati, who is sitting in your lap. I seek your blessing that may my wish be 
fulfilled and may I receive Sri Krishna as my husband." On her way back, 
Rukmani was walking very slowly for she was awaiting Lord's arrival, which 
was due in any moment. Just then, Lord Krishna appeared before her. Before 
she could ride her chariot Lord lifted her from amidst the crowd. And in the 
presence of hundreds of kings, Krishna and Balarama eloped away with 
Rukmani. 
KRISHNA DEFEATS RUKMI AND MARRIES RUKMANI  
Hearing the news that Krishna has eloped with Rukmani, Rukmi and all other 
kings present there boiled with anger. Accompanied by their huge armies, 
they decided to give them a chase. Thus chased my them, Yadnvanishis 
stopped and encountered the kings boldly. With a true ambition to win, brave 
Yadav soldiers defeated the enemies. All the kings like Jarasandh fled for their 

250 
 



lives. Rukmi had resolved that without getting Rukmani released from 
Krishna's captivity, he would not show his face in Kundanpur. He chased Lord 
Krishna for long. But Dwarakanath defeated him and got his head shaved. 
Thus defeating all the kings, Lord Krishna brought Rukmani to Dwarka. There 
they got married formally. All the people of Dwarka celebrated festivities for 
many days. People presented them with lot of precious gifts. All the people 
were in great joy to see Lakshmi as Rukmani with her husband Lord Krishna. 
BIRTH OF PRADYUMN, KILLING OF SHABARASUR  
Kamadev was a part of Lord himself. After getting incinerated by Rudra, 
Kamadev took refuge in the supreme Lord to get an incarnation once more. 
Thus, Kamadev was born as Rukmani's first son Pradyumn. But just after his 
birth, Pradyumn was kidnapped by a demon Shambarasur. The demon 
dropped the baby into the sea, where a huge fish swallowed him in whole. 
Coincidentally the fish was caught by the fishers and presented to the kitchen 
of Shambarasur. When the cooks cut the fish open, an extremely beautiful 
baby emerged. Mayawati, the governess of the kitchen, felt overjoyed to see 
the baby. She began to rear the baby with love and affection.  
Once Narada arrived in the kitchen and said: "Mayawati, do you know who is 
in your lap? “  
“No, O Devarshi, I found him from the belly of a fish," said Mayawati. Devarshi 
Narada said: "He is your husband Kamadev and you are his wife Rati. In this 
birth, he has appeared as Pradyumn the son of Krishna. Hearing this, 
Mayawati saluted Narada with respect. Since then she regarded Pradyumn as 
her husband and served him accordingly. When Pradyumn matured. 
Mayawati reminded him about his real appearance. Pradyumn, thereafter, 
killed Shambarasur and got married with Mayawati. Then the couple arrived in 
Dwarka. 
TALE OF SYAMANTAK THE GEM AND ITS THEFT  

251 
 



A person named Satrajit was a great devotee of Lord Suryanarayana. Pleased 
by his devotion, Suryadev presented him a gem called Syamantak. The gem 
had radiance equal to the Sun. 
Bearing that gem, Satrajit arrived in Lord's court. By the radiance of his gem, 
all the people and the courtiers mistook him for Suryadev and stood in his 
regard. But the Lord recognised him and asked his courtiers to be calm. Then 
to Satrajit, Lord Said: "Satrajit, your gem is really very beautiful. Nana 
(maternal grandfather) Ugrasen is the king of this region. If you present this 
gem to him, it will be very good. But Satrajit refused to present that gem. One 
day, later on, Satrajits brother Prasenjit went hunting, wearing the gem in his 
neck. In the forest a lion killed him and snatched the gem. The lion was in turn 
killed by the bear king Jambvant. Jambvant took the gem to his cave and gave 
it to his children to play with. When Prasenjit did not return from hunting, 
Satrajit felt sorry and accused Krishna that He had killed his brother for the 
gem. When Lord Krishna heard that he was being blamed for the mishap, He 
himself went to the forests. There he found the dead body of Prasenjit, but 
there was no sign of gem around the cadaver. He found only footprints of a 
lion leaving from there. Following the footprints, He discovered the dead lion 
and the footprints of a great bear. Following the footprints, He reached in the 
cave where Jambvant's daughter Jambvati was playing with the gem. 
As soon as Lord Krishna proceeded to take the gem, Jambvant arrived. A fierce 
duel resulted between them. They continued to fight for twenty-six days 
without truce. On the twenty-seventh day Jambvant requested Lord! "Please 
wait O Lord." Lord said: "Do you want to take rest?”  
“No", said Jambvant, "I have recognised you. You are none other than Lord 
Narayana Himself. 
Nobody else has the power to defeat me." Lord appeared before Jambvant as 
Sri Rama. 
Jambvant prayed and worshipped Him. He was feeling guilty that he dared to 
fight Lord. Lord said that He had arrived there for the gem only. Jambvant 

252 
 



gave him the gem and also his daughter Jambvati. Lord Krishna returned the 
gem to Satrajit and married Jambvati formally. 
KRISHNA’S OTHER MARRIAGES  
1.) Lord Krishna summoned Satrajit to His court and in the presence of the 
king Ugrasen, related the sequence of incidents that took place in the jungle. 
Satrajit felt ashamed. With a feeling of repentance he took the gem. He was 
getting afraid also that he made enemity with Lord Krishna without reason. 
Hence to expiate his crime, Satrajit thought of presenting the gem Syamantak 
and his daughter Satyabhama to Lord Krishna. Lord Krishna accepted 
Satyabhama as his wife but returned the gem to Satrajit saying: "It is a gift of 
Lord Suryadev. Keep it with you. You are required to deposit the gold that you 
get from it, in the royal treasure." Akrura and Kritvarma were not pleased with 
the marriage of Satyabhama. So they got Satrajit killed by Shatadhanva. 
Shatadhanva killed Satrajit in his sleep and absconded with the gem. Lord 
Krishna was then away in Hastinapur. Satyabhama too reached there and 
informed Krishna about her father's assassination. With Balarama, Lord 
Krishna chased Shatadhanva. But even after killing him, they could not trace 
the gem. Shatadhanva had given the gem to Akrura to keep till his return. But 
after the death of Shatadhanva, frightened Akrura came to stay in Kashi. From 
the effect of the gem Akrura performed many grand Yagyas there. Lord 
Krishna summoned Akrura from Kashi. After welcoming and treating him in 
the court, Lord Krishna asked him about the gem. Akrura showed the gem in 
the court. But Lord returned the gem to Akrura. 
2.) Once Lord Krishna visited Indraprasth to see Pandavas. There riding a 
chariot with Arjuna, He came to the forests. On the bank of river Yamuna a 
pretty woman was observing penance. By the instinct of God, Arjuna drew 
near her and asked for her identity. She said: "I am Kalindi, the daughter of 
Suryadev. I am penancing here in order to get married with Lord Krishna." 
Lord Krishna got Kalindi boarded on the chariot and got married to her 
formally.3.) Mitrvinda was the sister of Vind Anuvind the king of Ujjain. She 
had a desire to get Lord Krishna as her husband. But her brother, Vind 

253 
 



Anuvind was a follower of Duryodhan. So he stopped his sister Mitrvinda from 
getting married to Krishna. But Krishna eloped with Mitrvinda from the court 
and got married to her formally later on. 
4.) Satya was the daughter of Nagnjit, the king of Kaushal. She was extremely 
beautiful lady. 
The king had resolved that he would marry his daughter only to him who 
would defeat his seven most formidable oxen. Many princes has tried their 
luck since then but failed. When Lord Krishna heard about that, He reached 
Kaushal with his army. The king of Kaushal welcomed and treated him well, 
and told him about his resolution. Lord Krishna then took seven guises and in 
no time defeated his seven formidable oxen. Gladly the king married his 
daughter Satya to Lord Krishna. 
5.) Parashar says: "Parikshit, Lord Krishna‘s aunt (father's sister) Shrutkirti was 
married in the kingdom of Kaikauja. Bhadra was the daughter of Shrutkirti. 
Bhadra's brothers like Santardan etc. themselves had got their sister married 
to Lord Krishna. 
6.) Lakshmana was the daughter of the king of Madra. She was very beautiful 
and meritorious. 
Lord Krishna abducted her all alone from the Swayamvara organised for her 
marriage. Later, Lord Krishna married to her formally. 
SALVATION OF BHAUMASUR  
Pragjyotishpur was the capital of the demon Bhaumasur. He was very strong 
and powerful. He had snatched the canopy of Varuna, earrings of Aditi the 
mother of the Gods, and Maniparvat of the Gods on Meru. Apart from these, 
he had also captured sixteen thousand and one hundred princesses as well. 
Devraj Indra himself visited Dwarka and prayed Lord Krishna to get them rid of 
Bhaumasur's atrocities. With the dear wife Satyabhama and riding his vehicle 
Garuda. Lord Krishna arrived in the capital of Bhaumasur. But to enter 
Pragjyotishpur was an impossible task. But with the blows of his mace and 
arrows, Lord Krishna easily broke the hills, destroyed strategic positions and 

254 
 



cut the snares with sword. By his wheel he destroyed the walls of fire, water 
and air. With the loud sound of conch, Lord Krishna rendered the machines, 
installed there, useless. 
Ultimately, Krishna destroyed the rampart of the citadel. Disturbed by the 
noise, the five-headed demon Mur ran with a trident to kill Krishna. But with a 
single shot of his arrow, Lord Krishna broke his trident and cut his head with 
his wheel. Soldiers and commanders of Bhaumasur were also killed. 
Bhaumasur then came himself to fight. He had donned a shinning crown and 
was wearing big earrings. With his wheel, Lord Krishna cut the demon's head. 
As soon as He beheaded the demon, the Gods showered flowers on Lord 
Krishna and worshipped Him. Even the mother earth came and put a garland 
of five colours around lord's neck. She also presented to him the earrings of 
Aditi, canopy of Varuna, and a great gem. At the request of earth, Lord Krishna 
assured Bhaumasur's son Bhagdatt freedom from his fears.7.) After slaying 
Bhaumasur, Lord Krishna entered his palace. There He released the sixteen 
thousand one hundred captive princesses. The princesses were very much 
impressed by Lord Krishna. They had all accepted in their mind, Lord Krishna 
as their husband. Lord Krishna too bowed before their love and accepted 
them as his wives and arranged to send them to Dwarka. 
PRADYUMN'S MARRIAGE WITH RUKMVATI  
Rukmvati was the daughter of Rukmi, the brother of Rukmani. When a 
Swayamvara was organised for her, she saw Pradyumn. She was so impressed 
by him that she chose him as her husband. But it was not acceptable to other 
princes. They tried to stop their marriage. But defeating them all, Pradyumn 
abducted Rukmvati and married her formally. Then to please his sister 
Rukmani, Rukmi got his granddaughter Rochana married to Rukmani's 
grandsons Anirudh. 
MARRIAGE OF USHA-ANIRUDH  
The son of the demon king Bali, Banasur was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. 
Banasur ruled over the kingdom Shonitpur. By the grace of Lord Shiva, he had 

255 
 



received thousand arms. Even all the Gods including Indra used to serve him. 
Thus blinded by his physical strength, Banasur sought a boon from Lord to 
meet a match for his strength. Lord Shiva said: "O fool, your thirst for war shall 
be quenched when your flag is broken." Banasur had a daughter named Usha.  
Once she had a dream in which Anirudh was making love with her. She was 
very much perplexed by the dream. After a few days with the help of her 
friend Chitralekha, Anirudh sneaked into her palace. He stayed there and 
enjoyed the company of Usha for long. But Anirudh's clandestine stay could 
not remain hidden from the eyes of Banasura. So he put Anirudh in prison. 
There in Dwarka, everyone was worried by Anirudh's long absence. 
It was Narada, who ultimately revealed the fact that Anirudh was in the prison 
of Banasur. 
Hearing the news, Lord Krishna launched an attack on Banasur. His armies 
surrounded Shonitpur. During Ghurabandi the flag of Banasur's palace fell. 
Lord Shankar arrived to assist Banasur. Lord Krishna cut all the arms of 
Banasur. At the request of Shiva, he left only four of his arms intact. Banasur 
bowed his head before Lord Krishna and brought Anirudh and Usha 
respectfully before Him. With them Lord Krishna returned to Dwarka where 
formal marriage of Usha and Anirudh took place. 
TALE OF THE KING NRIG  
Once, Lord Krishna's sons visited the forests. There they saw a huge 
Chameleon fallen in a large, deep well. They tried to pull it out but in vain. The 
princes, therefore, returned to the palace and related this strange episode to 
Lord Krishna. Lord Krishna too came to the well and with His left hand, easily 
pulled the Chameleon out. 
As soon as the chameleon came out, it turned into a divine God and began to 
worship Krishna. 
He said: "O Lord Krishna, I am Nrig. The king Ikshvaku was my father. In my 
life, I had donated uncountable numbers of cows to the Brahmins. But once a 
cow, donated by me, returned to my cowshed. By mistake I made a resolution 

256 
 



to donate it to another Brahmin. My action led to a dispute between the two 
Brahmins, and my wisdom failed to settle their dispute. Both the Brahmins 
went away unsatisfied, but I met this fate after death. Since then, I had been 
in this well in the form of a chameleon. Now, by the graceful touch of your 
hands, O Lord, I have received salvation." King Nrig then went around Lord 
Krishna and returned to his heavenly abode."  
SALVATION OF PAUNDRAK  
Once Balarama and Krishna had gone to Braj to see Nandbaba there. 
Meanwhile the king Paundrak of Karush sent an envoy to Lord Krishna with a 
message that said: 'I am Lord Vasudev.' Pandrak's envoy arrived in the court 
and read out the message: "To bestow my grace on the people, I have taken 
an incarnation. You have falsely named yourself as Vasudev and bore my 
insignia. Take my refuge or face the battle." Hearing the message of Paundrak, 
Ugrasen and other courtiers began to laugh. Lord Krishna asked the envoy to 
inform Paundrak that He would launch His wheel on him and his army. 
Receiving the message Paundrak launched an attack on Dwarka with two 
Akshauhini armies. 
The king of Kashi was a friend of Paundrak. He too came to his assistance with 
three Akshauhini armies. Paundrak had disguised as Vasudev and was bearing 
artificial conch, wheel, mace and lotus and. He had also adorned Swastika, 
Kaustubh etc. All the people began to laugh at Paundrak's clown like attire. 
In no time, Lord Krishna stripped him of all his adornments. His wheel cut his 
head. Then with an arrow Lord Krishna cut the head of the king of Kashi. His 
head fell in front of his palace's gate. SuDakshain, the son of the Kashi king, 
organised a grand Yagya to avenge his father's killing. An ogress, Kritya 
emerged from the Yagya and began to burn Dwarka. All the people prayed 
Krishna to protect them. Lord Krishna assured them to be fearless and 
ordered His wheel Sudarshan to kill Kritya. Sudarshan extinguished the fire, 
killed Kritya and destroyed Kashi. 
Then it returned to Lord Krishna‘s finger. 

257 
 



SALVATION OF DWIVID  
There was once a monkey named Dwivid. He was the friend of Bhaumasur. 
When Dwivid heard about Bhaumasur's killing by Sri Krishna, he began to 
cause large-scale destruction in the kingdom. His disruptive activities in the 
country began to terrorise the subjects of Lord Krishna. 
Once hearing sweet music, the monkey was drawn towards the Raivtak 
Mountain. There he saw Balarama amidst beautiful young women. The 
monkey began to behave indecently. Angered by his indecency, Balarama hit 
him with his pestle, named Sunand, and killed the monkey. 
MARRIAGE OF SAMB Samb was the son of Lord Krishna and born to Jambvati. 
He had Kidnapped Lakshmana, the daughter of Duryodhan from her 
Swayamvara. Infuriated Kauravas chased them and, with difficulty, they 
caught Samb and tied him. When the Yaduvanshis got the news, they began 
preparations to launch an attack on Kauravas. Balarama pacified them and 
reached Hastinapur alone. There he received a warm welcome from the 
Kauravas. Balarama said to them: "It is an order of the king Ugrasen that you 
should see Samb off with his newly wedded wife." Hearing Balarama's words 
Kauravas got angry and began to deride Yaduvanshis. Infuriated by Kauravas 
derision, Balarama trained his pestle and plough. He intended to turn over the 
town of Hastinapur into the river Yamuna. When the city began to shake, 
Kauravas felt perplexed and begged Balarama for his pardon. Balarama 
assured them to be fearless and returned to Dwarka with Samb and his newly 
wedded wife Lakshmana. 
KINGS IN CAPTIVITY SEEK KRISHNA’S HELP TO KILL JARASANDH  
Once Lord Krishna was holding His court when an emissary arrived in the 
court. The kings who were held captive forcibly by Jarasandh had sent him. 
The emissary related the miseries of those kings to Lord Krishna. Through the 
emissary, the kings had requested: "O Lord of the world, Kindly get us free 
from our miseries. We are in your refuge. We desire your sight. Kindly bestow 

258 
 



us with your grace." Lord Krishna sent the emissary off with assurance of 
timely action. 
Meanwhile, Devarshi Narada arrived in the court and informed the Lord of 
Yudhisthira's intention to organise a grand Rajsuy Yagya and his cordial 
invitation for the Lord to attend the ceremony. Lord asked his friend Uddhava 
for an advice as to where He ought to go first - to Indraprasth in Rajsuy Yagya 
or to liberate the king from the captivity of Jarasandh. Uddhava advised Lord 
to go to Indraprasth first. There He would be able to serve both the purposes. 
Uddhava's advice was in the interest of all. Everyone supported it. Taking 
permission from His priest and teachers, Lord Krishna set out on a chariot with 
the whole family to reach Indraprasth. 
In Indraprasth, Pandavas accorded Lord Krishna with warm-hearted 
felicitations. By the dictate of Lord Krishna, Mayasur built a divine looking 
court for Yudhisthira. The courtroom was a marvellous piece of architecture. 
The shinning, smooth, floor of it appeared like water, while water bodies 
presented a look like marble floors. 
During Yudhisthira's Rajsuy Yagya, all the Pandavas set out in all the directions 
to conquer the kings and expand the boundaries of their kingdom. Warriors 
like Bhima, Arjuna defeated great kings all around and extended the 
boundaries of Yudhisthira's empire. But to defeat Jarasandh, - Bhima, Arjuna 
and Lord Krishna went in the guise Brahmins. They reached Jarasandh capital 
Girivraj and prayed him for donations. Jarasandh promised to give them the 
things of their desires. Lord Krishna then introduced them and begged 
Jarasandh for a duel with any of them. 
Jarasandh accepted to fight a duel with Bhima. He gave Bhima a mace and 
both of them came out to the outskirts of the town, where they began their 
duel. Both of them were equally strong and equally brave and well pitted. 
Twenty-seven days passed, but their duel remained inconclusive. On the 
twenty-eighth day, during the fight, Lord Krishna signalled Bhima a way to kill 
Jarasandh. He took a small twig in his hands and tore it apart into two. Bhima 

259 
 



understood the signal and beating Jarasandh on ground, he tore him apart in 
two pieces and threw them in opposite directions. Thus came the end of evil 
Jarasandh. Lord Krishna and Arjuna heartily greeted Bhima for his success. 
They then enthroned Jarasandh's son Sahadev and also got the captive kings 
released. 
SALVATION OF SHISHUPAL  
King Yudhisthira had invited great Vedic Brahmins and Acharayas on the 
occasion. Persons from Kauravas side like Drona, Bhisma, Kripacharya, 
Dhritarashtra, Vidura and Duryodhan etc. 
were too invited to witness the celebrations. Even Brahma, Shiv, Indra, 
Gandharvas, Vidyadhar had too arrived. But before the Yagya could start a 
dispute cropped up among the great sages as to who ought to be worshipped 
first in the Yagya. 
In the opinion of Sahadev (youngest of the Pandava brothers, not the son of 
Jarasandh), Lord Krishna deserved the first worship. Every one supported him. 
Only Shishupal could not tolerate the decision. 
He stood up and said: "In the presence of such great ascetics, savants, 
polymaths and sages, how can this cowherd deserve the first worship." 
Despite Shishupal bitter remarks Lord Krishna kept quiet. But Shishupal did 
not. Encouraged by Lord Krishna‘s silence he began to attack the kings, who 
stood by Lord Krishna‘s side, with sword. He was simultaneously abusing Lord 
Krishna also. Lord Krishna had assured Shishupal of this forgiveness for up to 
one hundred sins. But now Shishupal's sins have crossed that permitted 
number. So, quieting all, Lord Krishna cut his head with His wheel. As soon as 
the dead body of Shishupal fell on the ground, a flame emerged from it and 
merged with Lord Krishna.  
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, feelings of hostility had been accumulating in the 
heart of Shishupal for his past three births against Lord Krishna. It was 
because of these intense hostile feelings that Shishupal met salvation 
eventually. 

260 
 



After the salvation of Shishupal, ceremonies and rituals of Yagya proceeded 
unabated. At the end king Yudhisthira presented all those present there with 
fitting gifts and took ceremonial bath. 
At the request of Pandavas, Lord Krishna stayed in Indraprasth for many 
months. 
SALVATION OF SHALV  
Shukdev says: "Parikshit, now listen to the tale of how Lord Krishna caused 
salvation for Shalv. 
Shalv was the childhood friend of Shishupal and had attended the marriage of 
Rukmani as a member of Shishupal's wedding party. At that time, Yaduvanshis 
had defeated them all including Jarasandh and Shalv. Right at that moment, 
Shalv had resolved to destroy Yaduvanshis and began worshipping Gods of the 
Gods Pashupati (Shiv). Lord Ashutosh Shiva was pleased with him. As a boon, 
Shalv had got an aeroplane that was invincible even for the Gods, demons, 
humans, Nagas, etc and was particularly formidable for Yaduvanshis. By the 
dictate of Lord Shiva, the demon Maya constructed such an aeroplane of iron. 
The aeroplane named Saubh was as big as a city and was difficult to be 
spotted or caught. It could move as fast as one's wishes. 
Soon after getting the aeroplane, Shalv launched an attack of Dwarka. 
Surrounding Dwarka, Shalv began to destroy buildings and houses there. 
Seeing the people terrorised, Pradyumn consoled them to be fearless and he 
set out on a chariot to counter Shalv. He pierced Shalv with arrows. But 
Shalva's minister Dyumana attacked Pradyumna with a mace. 
By the blow of the mace, Pradyumn lost his consciousness. But soon he came 
around and began to slay Shalv's forces. The fierce battle continued for 
twenty-seven days. Lord Krishna was away then in Indraprasth Yagya. But He 
was sure that in his absence Kshatriya kings of Shishupal side would be 
attacking on Dwarka. 
Lord Krishna reached Dwarka and saw a fierce battle between Pradyumn and 
Shalv. Seeing Lord Krishna arrive, Shalv began to attack Him with sharp 

261 
 



arrows. Lord Krishna hit Shalv with a powerful blow of mace and he began to 
spit blood from his mouth. He then tried to show many illusions and showered 
Lord Krishna with weapons. But Lord Krishna wounded Shalv with his arrows, 
broke his aeroplane with his mace. Very soon thereafter the aeroplane 
plunged in to the sea. Shalv then attacked Lord Krishna with mace but Lord 
Krishna cut his head with Sudarshan wheel. Seeing his end, all the Gods 
showered flowers on Krishna. 
SALVATION OF DANTVAKTRA AND VIDURATH  
After the killing of Shishupal, Shalv etc. Dantvaktra arrived in the battlefield 
carrying a mace. 
When Lord Krishna saw him coming, He too jumped down from the chariot 
and balked his movement with a mace. Dantvaktra tried to humiliate God with 
his abuses and hit him on head with his mace. Lord Krishna easily bore the 
blow of mace and hit Dantvaktra's chest with his mace named Kaumodaki. 
Dantvaktra's heart tore apart by the blow and he fell dead. 
Vidurath was the brother of Dantvaktra. He came in the field with sword and 
shield to avenge his brother's death. Seeing him ready to launch an attack, 
Lord Krishna cut Vidurath's head with his wheel. Thus, Lord Krishna entered 
Dwarka only after killing Shalv, Dantvaktra and Vidurath. 
All the Gods and other inhabitants of heaven showered flowers on Him. 
SUDAMA: THE LORD KRISHNA’S FRIEND  
During his stay as a disciple at the hermitage of sage Sandipani, Lord Krishna 
had a Brahmin friend named Sudama. He was very indifferent in nature with 
no desires for the material things. 
After their education, Lord Krishna came to Dwarka while Sudama, who had 
no any inclination for accumulating material wealth, got married and began to 
pass his life with his wife Susheela in abject poverty. One day his wife Susheela 
said: "O lord, your friend Krishna is the king of Dwarka. He is very benevolent 
to Brahmins and his devotees. If you go to see him, he will understand your 
miseries and grant you a lot of wealth." But Sudama plainly refused saying: 

262 
 



"Devi, I have chosen the path of devotion for self upliftment and not for the 
wealth." Susheela, however, kept of insisting: "All right, don't go for the 
wealth. But at least you can go to see your old friend. Sudama accepted this 
proposition, thinking that only the sight of Lord yields supreme benefit to the 
devotee. But he wanted something as a gift to present to his old friend. At 
this, his wife tied four handfuls of raw rice in a bundle. 
With that humble gift, Sudama set out for Dwarka. His poverty was at its 
helm. But he kept on reciting Lord Krishna‘s name all along the way. After 
walking for some distance, Sudama felt thirsty. He drank water, quenched his 
thirst and thanked God that He at least does give water to drink. Sudama kept 
on walking the whole day. In the evening, he kept the bundle of rice under his 
head as a pillow and slept. 
Now it was Lord Krishna's turn to show His gratitude for the devotee. When 
Sudama awoke in the morning, he found himself right in front of Lord 
Krishna's palace. At first he could not believe his eyes; but the people told him 
that he was in Dwarka and standing right before the lord's palace. Sudama 
requested the gatekeeper to inform Lord Krishna that his childhood friend 
Sudama had come. Lord Krishna was sitting in the company of Rukmani when 
the gatekeeper delivered the message. As soon as Lord Krishna learned about 
Sudama's arrival, He stood up and ran helter-skelter to welcome his childhood 
friend. At the gate He cordially embraced Sudama and escorted him into his 
private chamber and made him sit on the throne. 
Krishna and queen Rukmani both washed Sudama's feet one by one. By the 
mere touch of his friend, Krishna was feeling overjoyed. His eyes filled with 
tears. He and Sudama were holding each other's hands. Their hearts were 
beating with the memories of their period as disciples at the hermitage of 
Sandipani. For long, none of them could utter a word. At last Sudama said: "O 
Jagadguru Krishna, I have the fortune of being your friend. What remains for 
me to do?" Lord Krishna said: "Brother, have you brought for me something 
sent by my sister-in-law? I love to accept even the pettiest thing presented 
with affection." At Krishna‘s words, Sudama felt ashamed and he did not 

263 
 



reveal the four handfuls of raw rice that he had brought as gift. With shame, 
Sudama began to look at the ground. Lord Krishna knew everything that his 
dear friend Sudama had never remembered him with a desire for wealth. This 
time too he has come at the insistence of his wife. 'Hence, I will give him the 
wealth that is rare even for the Gods,' thought Lord Krishna and snatched the 
bundle of raw rice and opened it with great respect. He put one handful of it 
in his mouth. When Lord proceeded to take next handful, queen Rukmani held 
his hand and prayed: "O Vishvambhar (fosterer of the world) for the 
prosperity of entire world this one handful is sufficient." Sudama stayed that 
night in the palace of Sri Krishna. There he experienced the comfort of 
Vaikunth (abode of God). Staying there for many days, Sudama at last, took 
leave of Sri Krishna and set out for his home. Lord Krishna did not give Sudama 
anything apparently nor did Sudama asked for His favour. He was travelling 
overwhelmed by a divine sense of devotion and felt that Krishna might have 
not given him wealth lest he should forget Him. 
Thus, sunk in myriad kinds of thoughts, Sudama reached his home. But at the 
place, where his dilapidated hut stood once there was now a divine palace 
surrounded by verdant gardens. The floors of the palace were embedded with 
precious gems and stones. Standing at the gate, Sudama felt confused, when 
his wife Susheela came out with scented water to welcome him. Tears were 
rolling on her cheeks. With love she greeted Sudama and escorted him inside 
the palace. Sudama was still reflecting over the God's grace and praying: "May 
I have the friendship of Lord in every birth, may my affection increase for Lord 
Krishna‘s feet. I don't want wealth." Since then, Sudama enjoyed the comforts 
of the palace as the bounty of Lord Krishna bestowed upon him by none other 
than the Lord Krishna himself. His devotion increased day by day. 
MEETING OF LORD KRISHNA WITH GOPIS 
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, Lord Krishna was passing his time with pleasure in 
Dwarka. A total solar eclipse happened to fall during that period. People from 
all over India thronged in Kurukshetra to take a dip in sacred Ganges on that 
great occasion. All the Yaduvanshis too arrived there. When Vrajvasis 

264 
 



(inhabitants of Vraj) learned about Krishna and Balarama's arrival in 
Kurukshetra, they too assembled there. 
During the festival, Lord Krishna met His foster-father Nand and other 
cowherds who were his childhood friends. Lord Krishna met the Gopis also 
who had been pining for his sight since long. 
They enjoyed the meeting and kept on chatting for long. Overwhelmed by 
love and joy, Vasudev embraced Nand. Lord Krishna and Balarama respectfully 
greeted mother Yashoda and father Nand. They too embraced Krishna and 
Balarama cordially. 
Gopis were specially overwhelmed by Lord Krishna‘s sight. They had no other 
desire but to have a sight of Lord Krishna. That day their long cherished dream 
had come true. Gopis imbued the captivating appearance of Lord Krishna and 
experienced the joy of embracing Him. Krishna met all the Gopis and 
embraced them. He inquired about their well being and preached them with 
spiritual knowledge. By the virtue of that knowledge, feeling of living 
disappeared among the Gopis and they merged with God forever. 
ORGANISATION OF YAGYA BY VASUDEV  
Devarshi Narada, Vyasa and many other great sages arrived in Kurukshetra to 
have a sight of Lord Krishna. Lord Krishna welcomed them all. Then Vasudev 
greeted them and enquired about way for his self-upliftment. Laughingly, 
Narada said: "Vasudev, a person, already living at the bank of the Ganges, 
discards her holy water and goes to other places of pilgrimage for his 
purification. 
In the presence of Krishna and Balarama, the sages said: "You regard the 
indescribable, eternal, Sachchidanand Sri Krishna as your son, and seek the 
way of your self upliftment from us. O Vasudev, recognise Him. Take to His 
refuge, only He can save you." Vasudev got the meaning of sage's words and 
began to develop feelings of devotion for his son. Every human being has 
obligation for the Gods, sages and his ancestors. The sages got a Yagya 

265 
 



performed in Kurukshetra by Vasudev to free him from the obligation for 
Gods. 
REVISTING OF DEVAKI'S SIX SONS  
In Dwarka, Krishna and Balarama used to greet their parent's first daily in the 
morning. Now Vasudev had recognised His identity. So after their return from 
Kurukshetra, when Krishna and Balarama went as usual to greet their parents, 
Vasudev greeted them first. Lord Krishna then preached his father about the 
metaphysical knowledge. With that knowledge, Vasudev began to see Krishna 
everywhere. 
Mother Devaki was also present there. Memory of her six children, who were 
killed by Kansa, was still afresh in her mind. She had heard that Krishna had 
fetched the dead son of Sandipani from Yamloka. So she prayed to them " You 
both are venerable even to the Gods. Kindly grant me my desire. Show me my 
six sons who were killed by Kansa. By their mother's dictate and helped by 
Yogmaya, both the brothers reached Sutal Loka. 
The demon king Bali welcomed them there and offered them a seat, and 
washed their feet. King Bali then asked God what could he do for Him. Lord 
said: O demon king, in Swayambhu Manvantara, six sons were born to Urna 
the wife of Prajapati Marichi. They were all Gods. They had once seen Brahma 
trying to copulate with his own daughter and hence derided at him. 
Indignant Brahma had then cursed them to take birth in demon incarnation. 
They therefore were born as the sons of Hiranyakashipu. 
In the present era, Yogmaya had made them born as Devaki's sons who were 
killed by Kansa. 
They are all now in your Loka. Mother Devaki is mourning for them, so we 
shall take them with us. They will thus be freed from the curse and go to their 
heavenly abode." Thus Lord Krishna and Balarama brought those six babies to 
Dwarka and handed them to mother Devaki. Seeing her babies again, Devaki's 
heart filled with love for her sons. Milk began to flood her breasts. She breast-

266 
 



fed them. Drinking the milk, all the babies received salvation. They then 
departed to their heavenly abode. 
LOVE AND MARRIAGE OF SUBHADRA AND ARJUNA  
King Parikshit asked: "Gurudev, how did my grandfather Arjuna and 
grandmother Subhadra got married? I want to hear this tale. Kindly narrate it 
to me." Shukdev said: Parikshit once travelling on a pilgrimage tour, Arjuna 
reached in Prabhas region. 
There he learned that Balarama was desirous of marrying his sister Subhadra 
to Duryodhan. But Vasudev and Krishna were not in the favour of this 
marriage. So, a strong urge took hold in his mind to get Subhadra as his wife. 
Acting as per the urge, Arjuna reached Dwarka in the guise of Vaishnav sage. It 
was rainy season then, so with an excuse of Chaturmasya Vrata (four months 
long fast), Arjuna stayed in Dwarka. During his stay, Balarama served and 
looked after him very well. But neither Balarama nor any other inmates of the 
palace could recognise Arjuna. 
Once Balarama invited Arjuna to his home. There he offered good, delicious 
food to Arjuna. 
Subhadra too served him well. There, they fell in love with each other. Later 
on, boarding a chariot, Subhadra went out of the palace for a joy ride. At the 
outskirts of the town, Arjuna was awaiting for her. He had already taken 
permission of Devaki, Vasudev and Krishna. Subhadra too had silently nodded 
her acceptance. 
So that evening Arjuna and Subhadra eloped from Dwarka. The news of 
Subhadra eloping with Arjuna first outraged Balarama. But Lord Krishna and 
other near and dear ones convinced and pacified him. 
RELEASE OF SHIVA FROM CRISIS 
Maitreya asked: "Gurudev, those among the Gods, human beings and the 
demons, who worship Lord Shiva, get wealth very soon. But those, who 
worship Lord Narayana, remain afflicted with scarcity. What is the reason for 
that?" In reply, Lord Krishna had said: "O Yudhisthira, I take away all the 

267 
 



wealth from those whom I bestow my grace. When they are poor, their 
relatives desert them. I even render their efforts useless when they try to earn 
money. Thus being unsuccessful repeatedly, the people develop an attitude of 
indifference for wealth. Then they begin to take shelter as my devotee and 
mingle with me. Only then, I bestow my full grace on them and they receive 
me as Sachchidanand Parabrahma. Thus, pleasing me through my worship is 
extremely difficult. Hence, ordinary people give me up and worship other 
deities, which are in fact different forms of me. Lord Shiva is Ashutosh and 
bestows his devotees quickly with grace. He gives wealth and other riches to 
his devotees. But once they get wealth, the devotees become despotic and 
even forget the God who had blessed them."  
Once upon a time, there was a demon Vrikasur. He had pleased Lord Shiva 
and sought a boon that the person, upon whose head the demon put his 
hand, should be incinerated at once. Lord Shiva granted the boon without 
considering the consequences. But as soon as the demon got this supernatural 
power, he ran to incinerate Lord Shiva first. The demon was eyeing Gauri 
Parvati, so he was determined to eliminate Lord Shiva. Now afraid of his own 
boon, Lord Shiva ran for his life, with the demon following him in hot pursuit. 
At last Shiva reached in Vaikunth and told Lord Vishnu about his crisis. Lord at 
once illumined the demon and made him put his hand, on his own head. By 
the virtue of the boon, the demon was incinerated in no time and thus Lord 
Shiva could be saved. 
TESTING OF TRINITY  
Once upon a time, all the sages assembled on the bank of Saraswati River. A 
dispute erupted among them as to who among the trinity was the greatest. By 
consensus they appointed sage Bhrigu to test the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu 
and Mahesh. Bhrigu reached to Brahma, but did not greet him. Brahma got 
infuriated but since the sage Bhrigu was his son, He did not curse him. 
Then Bhrigu visited Shiva. Lord Shiva proceeded to embrace the sage. But 
instead of accepting Shiva's welcome, the sage began to abuse Him, saying: 
"You violate the dignity of Vedas, so I will not meet with you." Angry Shiva 

268 
 



raised his trident to kill him, but Bhagvati stopped Him. At last Bhrigu reached 
Vaikunth to see Lord Vishnu. 
Lord Vishnu was lying with head in the lap of Lakshmi. Bhrigu kicked hard at 
His chest. But instead of getting angry, Lord Vishnu got up, bowed his head 
before the sage and begged pardon: "O Sage, pardon me, I could not welcome 
you at once, at your arrival. Your feet are soft, I hope they are not hurt. All my 
sins have been washed by the touch of your feet." Bhrigu felt very pleased by 
the serious talks of Lord Vishnu. His heart felt overwhelmed with excess of 
devotion. 
He returned to the assembly of the sages and narrated his experience. Since 
then Lord Vishnu is regarded as the Supreme and giver of peace and 
fearlessness. 
REVIVAL OF BRAHMN'S DEAD CHILDREN 
There in Dwarka lived a Brahmin. When the first son was born to his wife, it 
died immediately after birth. The Brahmin took his dead son to the royal court 
and complained: "My Son has died because of anti-Brahmin and licentious 
actions of the king." One by one, thus, eight sons were born to the Brahmin 
couple; but they all died immediately after birth. And the Brahmin kept on 
dumping his dead sons at the gate of the royal palace. 
When his ninth son was born, and died, Arjuna was also there in Dwarka. He 
made a promise to the Brahmins: I shall guard your son or commit self-
immolation. At the time of next delivery, the agitated Brahmin came to 
Arjuna. Training his bow and arrows, Arjuna made all arrangements to protect 
Brahmin's tenth son. Sanctified by many mantras, Arjuna's arrows constructed 
a fence around the labour room. A child took birth; but it too died after some 
time. Brahmin, then, cursed Arjuna. 
Arjuna scouted through all the three worlds and even the netherworlds in 
search of the Brahmin's dead son, but he could not find him anywhere. 
Ultimately accepting his failure and as per his promise, Arjuna proceeded to 
immolate himself. 

269 
 



Meanwhile, Lord Krishna too learned about Arjuna's vow and stopped him 
from selfimmolation. 
Thereafter, riding a divine chariot, Lord Krishna set out with Arjuna, towards 
west. 
Beyond the limits of cosmos. They reached the abode of Lord Vasudev in 
Tripadvibhuti. There Arjuna saw that Lord was present in Purushaottam's 
appearance. Sri Krishna and Arjuna greeted Him. 
Lord Purushaottam said in a serious voice: "O Krishna and Arjuna, only to have 
a sight of both of you, I brought the Brahmin's sons to me. Both of you had 
taken incarnation on earth from my part to protect the religion. All the 
demons have been slain by now. Now you too return to me. 
Sri Krishna and Arjuna again greeted Lord Purushaottam and returned on 
earth with all the sons of the Brahmin. Arjuna was greatly surprised to see the 
supreme abode of Lord Purushaottam. 
He felt that whatever strength a living being had, it been all by Sri Krishna's 
grace. Like common, ordinary people, the Lord Krishna stayed on earth 
enjoying mundane comforts, performed Yagyas like kings, behaved like 
idealistic people; deterred His subjects and slayed evil kings to re-establish 
religion on earth. 
 
CHAPTER SIX  
THE SAGES CURSE YADUVANSHIS  
Parashar said: "As the time passed, Yaduvanshis grew stronger and more 
influential. Now no longer did they like the welcoming and treating of the 
great sages by Lord Krishna. Lord Krishna knew about their disliking, but 
secretly He was pleased by this change in Yaduvanshi's behaviour, for He 
knew that by disregarding the saints and the scriptures, they would meet their 
end sooner. 

270 
 



Once the Yaduvanshis clothed Jambvati's son Samb in a woman's attire and, 
showing him to the sages asked mockingly: "Maharaja, this is our sister-in-law. 
She is an expecting mother. She feels shy to ask but tell us what will be born 
to her? Through their unfailing vision, the Sages knew the reality and said: 
"Fools, a pestle shall be born to her and that pestle shall exterminate the 
entire Yaduvansha. Now all the Yaduvanshis were perplexed by sages' 
prediction, and approached their king Ugrasen. But, even the king was 
helpless now because he could not change the words the pious sages. In due 
course, a pestle was born to Samb. Frightened of an imminent fate, 
Yaduvanshis crushed the pestle into a fine powder and threw it into the sea. 
Only a nail remained, that also was thrown into the sea where a fish 
swallowed it. A fisher caught the fish and cut it open and found the nail. He 
gave it to a hunter. 
The hunter fixed the nail in the head of his arrow. On the other hand, the sea 
waves washed the powder of the pestle ashore where it germinated and grew 
as luxuriant grasses. Later on, once all the Yaduvanshis assembled at the 
seashore for a picnic where they drank wine and began to fight with one 
another under intoxication. Soon their quarrel grew so high that they pulled 
out the grasses, which were growing there, to use as the arms. With the 
grasses the Yaduvanshis beat one another to death. 
NARADA PREACHES VASUDEV ABOUT BHAGAVAT  
Once Narada arrived in Dwarka. Vasudev prayed him and requested to 
provide him with pious company of Bhagvat Dharma. Narada said: "O king, 
once upon a time, nine great sages arrived in the court of the king Janaka. 
King Janaka had put the same curiosity before them also. I will narrate the 
conversation that followed there between the sages and the king." First of all, 
the first Yogishwar Kavi said: "O king Janaka, dedication is the first duty 
(Dharma) of a Vaishnav. He should devote everything - his actions, fruits of 
actions and even himself, at the feet of Lord. He ought to hear about Lord's 
virtues. Such a devotee shall be indifferent to the worldly affairs and shall 
laugh, dance or sing occasionally and sanctified all the three worlds." The king 

271 
 



then asked about the characteristics of the Lord's devotees. Another 
Yogeshwara Hari said: "A true devotee of the Lord remains unaffected by 
feelings like hunger, thirst, life, death, labour, pain, fear and desire. Such a 
devotee is the excellent kind of Bhagvat. Even the wealth of all the three 
worlds cannot shake the faith of such a devotee, because Lord Sri Hari himself 
stays in his heart.”  
“What is illusion?" A Yogeshwara Antariksh replied: "King, an illusion is also 
God's play. Having a possessive feeling about mundane is illusion. Thinking in 
terms of 'I', 'Me', 'Mine', 'My', 'You', 'Your' is also illusion. If one can have such 
an affection for God as he has for worldly things, one can easily surmount the 
illusion." King Janaka then asked about the method of worshipping Lord. A 
Yogeshwara, Karbhajan said: " O king, the Lord had a fair complexion in Satya 
Yuga. People used to receive Him through methods like meditation, 
reconciliation, etc. In Treta Yuga, the Lord had reddish complexion and Yagyas 
were the main means to achieve Him. In Dwapar Yuga, the Lord had yellowish 
complexion and He could be pleased through worships. In the present Kali 
Yuga, Lord has dark complexion and one can receive Him through means like 
recitation, narration and hearing of His name and plays. 
Thus, Narada preached Vasudev about Bhagvat Dharma. Now the heart and 
mind of Vasudev were thoroughly clean and pure. 
KRISHNA DEPARTS TO HIS ABODE AND DESTRUCTION OF YADUS  
To remind Lord Krishna about the moment of His departure, Brahma arrived in 
Dwarka accompanied by all the Gods. He prayed to Him: "O Lord, you have 
completed your duty of what we had once requested you. Now, You please 
return to your abode. Lord said: "On the seventh day from now, Dwarka shall 
submerge in the sea and Yadavas shall fight among themselves to death. I too 
shall depart then. The arrow of a hunter shall be the cause of my departure." 
When Uddhava learned that Lord Krishna was about to wind up His plays, he 
approached Him and said: "I understand, O Lord, that this all is happening by 
your wish. But I cannot part for a moment from your feet. Hence, take me also 
with you to your abode." Lord Krishna said: "Uddhava, I will not go anywhere. 

272 
 



My entire brilliance will be present in Srimad Bhagvat. You stay here preaching 
Bhagvat Dharma." Saying thus, Lord preached Uddhava about the Gita Jnana 
through the tale of Avadhoot. 
Lord Krishna narrated thus: "Uddhava, once, our ancestor Yadu happened to 
see Lord Dattatreya in a forest. Lord was indulged in the supreme joy in the 
guise of Avadhoot. Yadu asked him about the reasons for his whimsical state." 
Avadhoot had said: "O king, making the various animals, birds, insects etc as 
my teacher, I have learned about spirituality from them. 
That is why I am free from mourning and attachment. Earth, air, sky, water, 
fire, the moon the sun, pigeon, python, sea, grasshopper, bumblebee, honey 
bee, elephant, extractor of honey, deer, fish, prostitute, osprey, boy, girls, 
arrow-maker, snake, spider and wasp are all my teachers. I took refuge at 
these twenty-four teachers and learned from their behaviour. 
I learned forgiveness from earth, purity from the sky, holiness and cleanliness 
from the water, innocence and renunciation from the fire; indifferentness 
from the air, to remain unaffected by circumstances from moon, abdication 
from the Sun, incoherence from the pigeon, dependence upon fate and 
remain effortless from the python, to remain always happy and serious from 
the sea, to be under the control of sense organs and hence meet total 
destruction from the grasshopper, acquiring of virtues from bumblebee, fault 
in cumulating from honey bee, to abstain sensuous talks from the deer, to 
eliminate greed from the fish, sorrow in hope and happiness in desperation 
from the prostitute, to feel happy in uncertainty from osprey, dispute among 
many from the girls, concentration from the arrow-maker, to roam alone and 
detachment from a particular place from the snake, virtues of the creator Lord 
from the spider, and I learned similarity from the wasp." In the guise of 
Avadhoot, Lord Dattatreya says: "O king, I learned wisdom and apathy from 
my body also, because life, death, life and death again are inseparably 
intertwined with it. Hence the net result of loving this body is nothing but 
sorrow. Thus our own body also helps us to learn about metaphysical 
knowledge. 

273 
 



Lord Krishna also explained Uddhava regarding futility of physical and 
heavenly luxuries. This human body is like a tree, on which two birds - Jivatma 
and Paramatma (microcosm and supreme soul) - have taken shelter. Two 
fruits - happiness and sorrow - appear on it. Jivatma (microcosm) eats these 
fruits while Paramatma (supreme soul) stays as an indifferent onlooker. 
There are three kinds of Jiva - Baddha (Bound), Bhakta (devotee) and Mukta 
(liberated). Baddh Jivas (bound souls) are those who indulge in sensual 
pleasures and those who dislike pious company. Mukt Jiva (liberated souls) 
are those who are free from attachment and bindings. 
Bhaktas (devotees) are those who meditate on me and dedicate their 
everything in my feet and have love for my virtues. My devotee is kind, free 
from flaws, tolerant, has feeling of fraternity for all and controls his desires. 
BHIKSHU GEET  
Lord Krishna said: "Uddhava, in the world, there is indeed a dearth of such 
tolerant people who can tolerate bitter remarks of evil ones. In this context 
there is a tale of a greedy Brahmin who lived in Ujjain. That Brahmin had been 
badly tormented by the evil people after he had lost his wealth. But still the 
Brahmin did not lose his patience and regarding his present state as a result of 
his previous birth's deeds, he expressed his feelings thus: These people are 
not the cause of my miseries; neither the Gods, nor body, even planets and 
time, can be blamed for my miseries. Scriptures and learned ones held the 
mind itself guilty of one's miseries. It is the mind that runs the cycle of the 
world and makes every kind of efforts. 
In the absence of mind, even the soul is rendered motionless. When one 
accepts the dictates of the mind and indulges in sensual pleasures, soul too 
comes to be bound with them. The ultimate outcome of all the spiritual 
efforts like celibacy, study of Vedas etc. and abidance to pious actions is the 
concentration of mind. Concentration of mind and is abstaintation from 
sensual pleasures are the primary conditions for attainment of Paramayoga 
(supreme meditation). Thus Lord Krishna preached Uddhava about Jnana Gita. 

274 
 



Uddhava too took Bhagvat (which is a form of the Lord) with honor and 
departed for Badrikashrama. 
 
PART SIX  
DESCRIPTION OF DYNASTIES IN KALI YUGA  
Parashar describes about the dynasties that would occur in Kali Yuga. Ripunjay 
or Puranajay would be the last king of Brihdrath dynasty. The kings of Nand 
dynasty would succeed this dynasty. Then a diplomat Brahmin, named 
Chanakya, would exterminate this dynasty and enthrone Chandragupta 
Maurya. In Maurya dynasty, a great king would occur by the name of 
Ashokvardhan. After him, Yavans would rule then for six hundred and forty 
years. Their rule would be succeeded by the governance of the fair-
complexioned foreigners, who would rule for one hundred and sixty years. 
Thereafter, there would be no king and no subjects because people from all 
the classes would come forward to rule. 
The ruler would be selected by the majority votes. There would be no any 
thing like holiness. 
Cows would grow thin like nannies. People would not marry, as per their 
castes. Greed, selfishness and sex would be the base of marriage life. In 
adverse conditions, spouses would desert each other. There would be nothing 
like duty, responsibility and conduct. Hair would be the main item of 
adornment for the women. 
People would not have the knowledge of religious scriptures in Kali Yuga. 
Talkativeness would be identified with knowledge. Only those would be 
regarded as clever, who could pick others' pockets. Children would not regard 
or pay due respect to their parents. Children would maintain relations with 
parents till their marriage only, not after that. Boys would not touch the feet 
of their own parents, but would pay full respect to their father and mother-in-
law. Brother-in-law would be dearer to them than their own brother. Parashar 
says: Kali Yuga is the mine of faults, but it has only one great virtue - that the 

275 
 



people will acquire divine position only by reciting Lord's name. Recitation of 
Lord's name, regardless of intention and motivation-- whether it is love, 
derision, laziness or maliceness- would destroy one's sins. 
But the sinister people would do even the most difficult tasks in Kali Yuga, but 
they would not recite Lord's name. They would not have an interest in the 
Lord. Their interests would be more in sensuous things like sound, touch, 
beauty, scent etc. 
The Paramagati (supreme salvation) that people could receive by ten 
thousand years of meditation in Satya Yuga; by performing Yagya for hundred 
years in Treta Yuga and by worshipping Lord's idol for ten years in Dwapar, 
that supreme salvation is easily available for people in Kali Yuga simply by 
reciting Lord's name for one day and one night continuously. But still, in Kali 
Yuga people would not have faith in Lord's name. It is their misfortune. 
Home   
  

276 
 



4. SHIVA MAHAPURANA  
SHIVA MAHAPURANA: INTRODUCTION  
First of all, Sage Shaunak expressed his desire to Suta about knowing the 
means, which could help a man in this era of Kali to attainment Lord Shiva, by 
cleansing all the impurities of his mind and rectifying his inherent demonic 
tendencies. Suta then described about Shiva Mahapurana - the supreme of all 
the Puranas, which was narrated by Lord Shiva himself and which was later on 
retold by Sage Vyasa with the permission of Maharshi Sanatkumar, for the 
benediction of common man. Suta said, "By understanding the mysteries of 
ShivmahaPurana and singing its praises, a man attains greater virtues than 
that which could be attained by being charitable or by the performance of all 
the `yagyas'. Contemplating on the subject matters of Shiva Mahapurana give 
auspicious fruits just like a 'Kalpa-taru' (A mythological tree which fulfills all 
the wishes). 
Shiv Mahapurana contains twenty-four thousand shlokas and seven Samhitas 
which are Vidyeshwar, Rudra, Shatrudra, Koti Rudra, Uma, Kailash, and 
Vayviya. Shiva Mahapurana is the best means for man's liberation. 
PROPER METHOD OF LISTENING TO SHIVA PURANA 
Sage Shaunak requested Suta to tell about the proper method of listening to 
Shiva Purana, so that the mankind gets complete benefit. Suta replied- "First 
of all, an auspicious moment should be determined by an Astrologer. After 
that, friends and relatives should be invited, especially those who have the 
tendency of being away from such occasions. The sages and the virtuous 
people should be invited too. The 'Katha' must be help in scared places like 
Shiva temple, any place of pilgrimage or in one's home after doing a Bhumi 
Pujan of the land where one intends to held the Katha of Shiva Purana. The 
canopy should be well decorated.”  
“After making a resolution and doing worship of Ganapati - the destroyer of all 
hurdles and obstacles the Katha should be commenced. The person who is 
telling the 'Katha' should be facing north and all the listeners should sit facing 

277 
 



east. The person who is telling the 'Katha' should be a scholar and should be 
capable of clearing all the doubts from the listener's mind. There should be no 
kind of distraction during the 'Katha' period. A devotee, who listens to the 
Katha leaving behind all of his worldlys worries get complete benefits. A 
devotee should also make donations and offerings according to his capacity 
and capability otherwise he would become a wretched man. The Mantra 'OM 
NAMAH SHIVAY' should be chanted through out the period of Katha. 
An uninitiated person does not have the right to listen to the Katha of Shiva 
Mahapurana. So a man desirous of listening to Shiva Mahapurana should first 
get initiated. 
A devotee who has taken the vow of listening to the Katha of Shiva 
Mahapurana, should follow a celibate life. He should sleep on the floor and 
should have only fruits in the diet. He can have his normal dinner only after 
the completion of the Katha. The diet should be fresh and pure. He should 
also try to avoid sinful tendencies like lust, anger, greed, attachment and 
condemning other, etc. Making donations of even meager things give 
undiminishing virtues. 
After the methodical completion of the Katha, a devotee should perform 
UDDYAPAN (Conclusion of the Katha), which is similar to the CHATURDASHI 
UDDYAPAN. The devotee should also charitably make donations to all the 
Brahmins who have helped in the performance of Katha. On the next day the 
'Path' of SHIVA GITA should be performed. If the devotee (listener of the 
Katha) is a householders, then he should perform 'Havan' with the ghee 
prepared from Cow's milk, for the pacification of the unhindered completion 
of the Katha. The Havan should be performed, either with the help of 'Rudra 
Samhita mantras' or 'Gayatri Mantra' or with the shlokas of Purana. 
 
PART ONE  
VIDYESHWAR SAMHITA SAGES ENQUIRE  

278 
 



Viddyeshwar Samhita which is classified into twenty five chapters, has a 
narration in its first chapter which goes as follows 
Once upon a time, the sages were performing a yagya at Prayag kshetra. Sage 
Suta came to know about this and arrived there. All the sages were very 
pleased to see him. They requested:-"Lord! Though we have heard many tales 
from you regarding the man's benediction, but today we want to listen to 
something special. Because in this present era of Kali, when all the castes have 
forgotten about their respective duties we want to know is there any way to 
prevent the deterioration in the human values?" Suta replied:- "O Great men! 
Your enquiry has great relevance in this era of Kali. I will certainly tell you 
about the way by the help of which a man can achieve benediction. Shiva 
Mahapurana contains the essence of Vedantic philosophy, which gives worldly 
pleasures as well as Salvation. Mere remembrance of it destroys all the sins of 
a man. One who studies the Rudra-Samhita attentively, his gravest of sins are 
destroyed instantaneously. One who studies Rudra-Samhita' silently, sitting in 
front of Bhairav-idol, all of his aspirations are fulfilled. A man gets liberated 
from the sin of killing a Brahmin, if he studies Rudra Samhita while 
circulbulating around a Banyan tree.”  
“Kailash Samhita is even superior than Rudra Samhita, as it elaborates upon 
the meaning of Omkar. Shiva Mahapurana is created by Lord Shiva Himself. It 
contains twelve Samhitas which are - Viddyeshwar, Rudra, Vinayak, Uma, 
Matri, Ekadash-rudra, Kailash, Shat-rudra, Koti-rudra, Sahastra Koti, Vayaviya 
and Dharma.”  
“Initially it contained one lac shlokas but it was precised to twenty-four 
thousand shlokas by sage Vyasa. The present Shiva Purana is the fourth one 
which consists of seven Samhitas. The earlier three Shiva Puranas are 
unavailable. The scientific analysis of the Vedantic mysteries are the main 
subject of this divine Shiva Purana. The study of Shiva Purana helps a man to 
attain Dharma, Artha, Kam and Moksha. 
Suta continued with his narration:- "During the initial period of 'Svet Varaha 
Kalpa'. Six prominent sages collected near Triveni and started debating as to 

279 
 



who was the greatest deity, among Brahma Vishnu and Mahesh. Their debate 
remained inconclusive, so they went to Lord Brahma to seek the answer. 
Lord Brahma told them:- "O revered Sages! The source of Vishnu, Rudra all the 
deities including myself and all the other creations is none other Mahadeo. 
Union with the Shiva should be the objective of a man to attain that objective. 
Listening to the qualities of Lord Shiva, singing devotional songs in his praise 
and contemplating on him are the greatest means, which help to unite with 
Shiva." Purification of the mind by the help of doing worship and chanting the 
name of God is called contemplation. Singing devotional songs in the form of 
stotra, or hymns of the vedas or even in one's own language is called Kirtan. 
The above mentioned three activities are the supreme means to attain 
liberation. 
 GREATNESS OF SHIVALINGA--PILLAR OF FIRE-- OMKAR  
According to Suta, if a person is incapable of following the above mentioned 
three activities i.e. 
Shravana, Kirtan and Manan then he should worship the Shivalinga. Even by 
doing this he can attain liberation from all the bondages of the world. 
Describing about the majesty of Shivalinga, Suta says: "Lord Shiva is the 
manifestation of Almighty God (Brahma) himself and for this very reason he is 
known as Nishkal. Because of his divine beauty, Shiva is called Saguna (God 
with form). The term Saguna is also expressed in another way, that is Sakal. 
Shivalinga is worshipped since it symbolizes the form of Shiva. Lord Shiva is 
also considered to be Nirguna (without any qualities.)”  
“In the first Kalpa of Swet Varaha, a battle was fought between Lord Brahma 
and Lord Vishnu to prove their superiority. Lord Shiva manifested before 
arrogance. After that he also showed them his form in the shape of Shivalinga. 
From that day onwards the Shivalinga became famous." Nandikeshwarji 
narrates the tale of battle between Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu." 
Once while travelling Lord Brahma reached the abode of Lord Vishnu. He saw 
Lord Vishnu. He saw Lord Vishnu resting on Shesh-Nag and being attended by 

280 
 



Garuda and other attendants. When Brahma saw that Vishnu did not get up to 
receive him, he became very angry. Very soon, verbal dual erupted between 
them. It became so severe that a battle was fought between them, which 
continued for very long time. All the deities arrived from the heaven to watch 
the battle. They became very worried when they saw no sign of battle coming 
to an end. They decided to go to Lord Shiva, to seek his help. 
"Though Lord Shiva knew everything, but still feigning ignorance, he asked 
about the well beings of the world. The deities told him about the battle, 
fought between Brahma and Vishnu.”  
“Lord Shiva then sent his one hundred Ganas to pacify both of them. He too 
went there accompanied by mother Parvati, boarded on a chariot. When Lord 
Shiva reached there, he saw that Brahma and Vishnu were about to use their 
deadly weapons- Maheshwar and Pashupat respectively. Fearing the 
destruction, which these deadly weapons might have caused, Lord Shiva 
manifested himself in the form of 'Analstamba' (pillar of fire) between them. 
Brahma and Vishnu had already released their weapons- Maheshwar and 
Pashupat. Both the weapons fell into that pillar of fire and got destroyed. 
"Brahma and Vishnu were very surprised to see the pillar of fire, which was so 
enormous in size that it reached the sky and penetrated down the earth. 
Vishnu transformed himself into a boar and went to the 'Patal' (nether world) 
to find the base of that 'Pillar of fire'. But he was unsuccessful in his attempt 
and came back. Similarly Brahma transformed himself into a swan and flew up 
in the sky to find its limit. While going through the aerial route he met a 
withered 'Ketaki' flowers, which had still some freshness and fragrance left in 
it.”  
“Lord Shiva smiled at the futile attempts of Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu. As a 
result of his smile the Ketaki flower fell down from the branch. Ketaki flower 
told Brahma that he had been present there since the beginning of the 
creation, but was unable to know about the origin of that 'Pillar of fine'. The 
flower also advised Brahma against making any effort in that direction, as it 
would be of no use.”  

281 
 



“Brahma then sought the help of Ketaki flower to give a false witness before 
Lord Vishnu, that he (Brahma) had been successful in seeing the limit of that 
pillar of fire. Ketaki flower agreed. Both of them went to Vishnu and Brahma 
told him that he had seen the limit of that Pillar of fire. 
Ketaki flower gave a witness. Vishnu accepted the superiority of Brahma.”  
“Lord Shiva became very angry with Brahma. He proceeded to punish Brahma 
for his falsehood. 
Lord Vishnu requested Lord Shiva to spare the life of Brahma. Lord Shiva 
became pleased with Vishnu and accorded him the same status as that of his 
own." Nandikeshwar continuing with the tale said: "After according same 
status to Vishnu as that of his own, Lord Shiva opened his third eye from it 
manifested 'Bhairav'. He ordered Bhairav to kill Brahma. Bhairav severed the 
fifth head of Lord Brahma with his sword. Brahma became very terrified. He 
was trembling in fear. Lord Vishnu felt pity on his condition and requested 
Lord Shiva to forgive him. 
Lord Shiva then stopped Bhairav, but told Brahma. 
"You spoke untruth with a desire to become worshippable. It is my curse that, 
you will not be worshipped by anybody. You will posses only four heads." 
Brahma begged his forgiveness. Lord Shiva feeling pity on Brahma gave him a 
boon of being the presiding deity of all the yagya. Similarly the Ketaki flower 
also prohibited from being used during worship. But when Ketaki flower 
tendered his apology Shiva gave blessing that it would be fortunate to be 
offered to Lord Vishnu during the worship. 
Lord Vishnu and Brahma made salutations to Lord Shiva and offered him a 
seat. They then worshipped him. This was the first time Brahma and Vishnu 
had worshipped Lord Shiva. Shiva was very pleased. Shivaratri has been 
continued to be celebrated since that day. This particular day is considered to 
be the most auspicious day for the worship of Lord Shiva. 

282 
 



A devotee who fasts on Shivaratri remaining only on fruits, attain virtues 
equivalent to the worship done for the whole year. The idol of Shiva is 
consecrated on this day. 
Lord Shiva has himself told the deities that he had manifested in the form of 
Pillar of Fire' in the month of Agahan and during the constellation of Ardra. He 
also said-"One who has my darshan on this day (Shivaratri) or worships me in 
my form of linga is dearer to me than Kartikeya. The place where, I manifested 
in the form of Pillar of fire will become famous as Lingasthan. Because of its 
resemblance with the 'Mountain of Fire', it will also be known Arunachal." 
Later on Shiva brought back to life all the people who had died in the battle, 
fought between Brahma and Vishnu. 
Lord Shiva then preached Brahma and Vishnu on the five duties (Panchakritya) 
saying that 'Srishti' (creation), 'Sthithi' (position), Samhar (annihilation), 
Tirobhav (concealment) and 'Anugrah' (obligation or kindness) are the five 
duties by which this world functions. 
The source of this world in 'Sarga' or Nature. The establishment of this world 
is 'Stithi' or position. The tendency of this world to destroy is Samhar or 
destruction. The feeling of absence of this world is Tirobhav or concealment 
and Moksha or salvation is obligation or Anugrah. 
Lord Shiva then goes on to explain that the first four duties like Sarga (Nature) 
etc help in the nurturement of the world and the fifth duty Anugrah is a giver 
of salvation. 
Lord Shiva also told them (Brahma and Vishnu) that he (Shiva) had blessed 
both of them to look after the two duties i.e. Srishti and Sthiti. Rudra and 
Mahesh have been entrusted with the job of Sanhar and Tiribhav. "The fifth 
duty 'Anugrah' has been kept by me." Said Shiva. 
After describing about the allocation of various duties, Lord Shiva described 
the meaning of 'OMKAR' to them. He said that OMKAR signified the world and 
contained the power of Shiva and Shakti. This powerful mantra gives all kinds 
of worldly accomplishment as well as salvation. 

283 
 



After that Lord Shiva initiated Brahma and Vishnu with the OMKAR' mantra 
and preached them on the importance of the worship of Shivalinga. 
RITUALS OF THE WORSHIP OF SHIVA—SACRED PIGRIMAGES On the request of 
the sages, Suta describes about the methods of worshipping Shivalinga. He 
says-- "One should construct a Shivalinga either of mud, rock or metal and 
establish it in such a place where it can be worshipped daily without any 
hindrance.”  
“The 'Char' (mobile) Linga should be small in size and the Sthira (fixed) linga 
should be large. 
The Linga should be constructed along with the pedestal. The rule for 
constructing a Shivalinga has been specifically described. The breadth of 
thickness of the Linga should be twelve times the thickness of the devotees 
(one who is constructing the linga) finger, while the length should be twenty-
five times. After establishing the linga in the above mentioned way, it should 
be worshipped after performing the Shodasopachar. The thumb also 
symbolise a Shivalinga and its worship can be done. While worshipping the 
Shivalinga, the mantra OM NAMAH SHIVAY should be continuously chanted. 
Chanting this mantra for five crore times, helps a man in attaining to the 
abode of Shiva. Worship of Shiva done during the mid night is considered to 
be especially fructifying. 
There are numerous places of pilgrimages connected with Shiva at the banks 
of river Ganges and river Indus. River Saraswati is considered to be a 
sacrosanct river and having an opportunity of living at its banks, helps in 
attaining to the abode of Brahma. 
Similarly, there are famous temples of Lord Shiva at Kashi, Naimisharanya, 
Badrikasharama and Kedar etc. There are many temples of Shiva at the banks 
of holy river like Ganges, Yamuna, Saraswati, Godavari, Narmada, Kaveri, 
Sarayu, Tungabhadra etc. Worshipping Shiva at these places bestows 
undiminishing virtues and liberates a man from all of his sins. 
CONDUCT OF THE RESPECTIVE CASTES--DHARMA  

284 
 



On the request of the sages, Suta described about the virtuous and invirtuous 
activities of a man according to the respective castes he belongs to. He said: 
"A Brahmin who performs the rituals, as described in the Vedas, only is 
entitled to be called a Dwija. A Brahmin who is not that proficient in the Vedas 
is called a 'Kshatriya Brahmin'. A Brahmin engaged in agricultural activities and 
business is called a Vaishya-Brahmin'. A Brahmin who is in the habit of 
condemning and criticizing others, is called a 'Shudra-Brahmin'. 
"A Kshatriya who looks after the welfare of his subjects is called a king, while 
the rest of them are known as simply Kshatriya. A Kshatriya who indulges in 
business is called a Vaishya Kshatriya. Similarly a Kshatriya who engages 
himself in the service of the three superior castes - Brahmin Kshatriya and 
Vaishya is called a Shudra Kshatriya. 
Dharma is considered to be of two types- 1) Dharma performed by matter and 
materials. 2) Dharma performed by indulging in physical activities. 
The performance of Yagya etc comes in the first category. Making pilgrimages 
of holy places comes in the second category. During the Satya Yuga, 
meditation was the way to attain self knowledge. During Treta Yuga, it was 
attained by penance, during Dwapar Yuga it was attained by performing 
'Yagya' while in the present era of Kali Yuga, idol worship is considered to be 
the means to achieve self-realization. Invirtuosity invites sorrow while 
virtuosity bestows joy and happiness. 
'THE IMPORTANCE OF AGNI-YAGYA'  
The sages then asked Suta about the Agniyagya, Brahma yagya, and Guru Puja 
in order of importance. 
Suta said-"Performing 'havan' by offering matter and materials into the sacred 
fire, is called Agni yagya. 
This ritual is especially meant for the Brahmachari (celibates). Performing 
havana during the evening time brings prosperity, while performance of 
havana during the morning times gives long life. Making sacrifices to the 

285 
 



deities during the daytime is called 'Deva Yagya'. A Brahmin should perform 
'Brahma yagya with the help of the study of the Vedas.”  
“First of all Lord Shiva adopted an auspicious day for himself and named it 
Sunday. After that he named the Six remaining days of the week and 
attributed them to the following deities respectively - Monday (Durga), 
Tuesday (Skanda), Wednesday (Vishnu), Thursday (Yama), Friday (Brahma), 
and Saturday (Indra). 
Worshipping the deities on their respective days give peace properity and all 
kinds of accomplishments. 
APPROPRIATE PLACE AND TIME FOR WORSHIPPING SHIVA In the Vidyeshwar 
Samhita of Shiva Purana, describing about the importance of place and time 
for worship of Shiva says- "Worshipping Shiva at a pure place in a house gives 
appropriate fruits, while worship done in a cowshed gives virtue, which are 
ten-times more than the former one. Worshipping Shiva at the banks of a river 
gives, ten times more virtues than the second one. Worship of Shiva done 
either in temple, under the basil plant etc. or at the banks of Sapt Ganga, gives 
ten times more virtue than the third one. If Shiva is worshipped at the 
seashore than the fourth one, while worshipping Shiva on the peak of a 
mountain, gives ten times more virtue than the fifth one. But worship done 
with a fully concentrates mind, gives the best fruits. 
During the Satya Yuga performance of Yagya and donations gave complete 
results. During the Treta Yuga it gave half, while in the present Kali Yuga it 
gives one-fourth results. Virtuosity performed with a pure heart does not go in 
vain. The other auspicious days in order of their increasing importance are 
'Surya-Sankranti', Tula Sankranti and Mesh-Sankranti, Lunar eclipse and Solar 
eclipse respectively. 
WORSHIPPING THE IDOL OF SHIVA  
It has been mentioned in the sixteenth chapter of Viddyeshwar Samhita that 
all the desires of a man are completely fulfilled, if he worship even in earthen 
idol of Shiva. For making an idol of Shiva, clay should be acquired from the 

286 
 



base of river, pond, well or any such other place. In this clay fragrant powder 
and milk should be added to make it into a paste. After the constructing of 
idol is complete, it should be worshipped by all the sixteen types of rituals 
Shodasopachar. 
If the Shivalinga is constructed by somebody else, then three 'sera' of 
Naivedya should be offered to the deity, whereas if one himself has 
constructed the Shivalinga then the one-fourth of a 'Sera' should be offered. If 
such an idol s worshipped for one thousand times, then it helps a devotee in 
attaining to the Satyaloka. Performing 'abhishek' of such an idol helps in self-
purification, offering fragrance gives virtues, Naivedya increases the life span 
and worshipping it with 'Dhoop' gives wealth and prosperity respectively. 
Worshipping the idol with a burning lamp gives knowledge to the devotee, 
whereas offering beetel leaves gives splendours. 
A devotee who worships Lord Shiva in the Hindu month of Magh and on 
Krishna Chaturdashi achieves longevity of life. Both, worldly pleasures and 
salvation are achieved by worshipping Shiva. 
Worshipping Shiva in the Hindu month of Kartik by going Japa, penance etc 
gives special fruits and the devotee becomes free from all kinds of diseases. 
If a devotee worships Lord Shiva on Sunday he becomes free from rebirth. 
THE MAJESTY OF PRANAV PANCHAKSHAR  
The root sounds Akar, Ukar, Makar, Bindu and Nad, which are free from the 
delusions and which originates from the mother nature are called Pranav. It is 
of two types:-a)Gross, b) Subtle. 
(Pranav Mantra OM AND OM NAMAH SHIVAY! It symbolizess the unified 
power of Shiva and Shakti and destroyes all the sins of a man. A man desirous 
of worldly pleasures must chant the mantra 'Hrishva Pranav' containing the 
three root sounds A, U, and Ma, which symbolizes Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahesh respectively. On the other hand a man aspiring for the salvation, must 
chant the mantra 'Deergha Pranav' containing A, U, Ma, Nad and Bindu. 

287 
 



Before commencing the study of Vedas pronouncing OMKAR is a must. By 
chanting 'Pranav' for nine crore times man becomes pure. By chanting it for 
further nine crore times a man develops a control over natural forces like 
wind, smell and earth etc. 
This Pranav mantra is considered to be most powerful and helps a man to 
attain the abode of Shiva. 
WORLDLY BONDAGES AND SALVATION  
In the eighteen chapter, all the sages requested Suta to explain the meaning 
of bondages of life and Salvation Suta replied- "Because of the eight types of 
bondages which a man feels on this earth, the soul is also known as "Jiva". The 
Jiva becomes liberated only after becoming free from these eight bondages. 
These eight bondages are - Nature, Intelligence qualitative- ego and the 
Panchatanmatras i.e. Sound, touch, appearance, taste and smell. 
"Each soul is binded by these eight aspects of the Nature. The actions 
performed as the result of these bondages is called Karma. A man reaps the 
fruits of his actions- whether good or evil. He either enjoys pleasures or 
suffers because of sorrow, due to this Karma." The soul takes rebirth in a cyclic 
was binded by the effects of his Karmas. The eight Chakra' are nothing but the 
eight forms of the nature. Shiva is beyond the reach of these eight chakras, on 
the contrary he has full control these eight chakras. So a man can become free 
from the bondages of this world, only by worshipping Shivalinga. The linga is 
both gross as well as subtle. There are five types of Linga on this earth.- 
Swayambhu Linga, Bindu Linga, Pratisthit Linga, Char Linga, Guru Linga. A 
person desirous of worldly pleasures should worship the cross Shivalinga, 
where as one who is desirous of attaining salvation must worship the subtle 
Shivalinga."  
THE WORSHIP OF PARTHIVA LINGA  
Suta then explains the greatness of worshipping a Parthiva Linga-: "Parthiva 
Linga is the most supreme among all the Shivalingas. All the aspirtions of he 
deities as well as men are fulfilled by the worship of Parthiv linga. During the 

288 
 



era of Satya, jewel was considered to be of prime importance, where as during 
Treta Yuga and Dwapar Yuga, gold and mercury had the prime importance 
respectively. In the present era of Kali, a Parthiva Linga holds this place of 
honor. The worship of Parthiva Linga begets more virtues than even penance. 
Just as Ganga among the rivers, Kashi among the sacred places of pilgrimages, 
Omkar among all the mantras are considered to be superior, In the same way 
Parthivalinga is considered to the supreme among all the Linga. Worshipping, 
a Parthiva linga with a 'Nishkam bhava' helps a man to attain liberation." Suta 
elaborately describes about the methods of doing worship of Parthiva Linga:- 
"After becoming fresh in the morning, a man should wear a rudraksha garland 
in his neck and apply Bhasma (ash) on his forehead. He should then worship 
the Parthiva Linga. He should chant the various names of Shiva, while 
worshipping the Parthiva Linga, like Har, Maheshwar, Shambhu, Shoolpani, 
Mahadeva, etc. After worshipping the Parthiva Linga, it should be immersed in 
the river, Then the mantra - OM NAMAH SHIVAY should be canted with 
complete devotion. This is the method which has been described in the Vedas 
for the worship of Parthiva Linga." The numbers of Parthiva Linga differ 
according to one's desires. For example a man who is desirous of learning and 
knowledge must worship one thousand Parthiva Linga. A man who is desirous 
of wealth must worship. One thousand five hundred Parthiva Lingas. A man 
who is desirous of attaining salvation must worship one crore Parthiva Lingas. 
Parthiva linga, which is equivalent to the height measured by the four fingers 
and which has been established on a beautiful pedestal, is considered to be 
the best. Parthiva Linga which is the half of the above mentioned height is 
considered to be medium; and still half than the second category is 
considered to be inferior Parthiva Linga. It is better and advisable to worship a 
single Parthiva Linga daily, because it is equivalent to the worship of the whole 
world. Nobody is barred from worshipping Shiva, except the people whose 
ancestors had been cursed by the sages like Dadhichi, Gautam. Such people 
should also worship the eight idols (earth, water, fire, air, sky, sun, moon and 
the host) alongwith the Parthiva linga. A Brahmin should worship Parthiva 

289 
 



linga as per the methods described in the vedas. Worship should be done, 
facing north. 
IMPORTANCE OF NAIVEDYA AND BILVA-LEAVES  
Suta then described about the important of Naivedya offered to Lord Shiva. 
"A devotee gets liberated from all of his sins merely at the sight of the 
Naivedya, which have been offered to Lord Shiva. He attains great virtues by 
having the Prasada." A man must not accept the Prasada if the worship have 
been done under supervision of a 'Chandala', but some of the Shivalingas like 
Banlinga, Siddhalinga and Swayambhu Linga are exceptions to this rule. The 
prasada which has been offered to the Shivalinga and remains lying on it, is 
prohibited from having, but the prasad which is not touching the Shivalinga 
should be accepted. 
Bilva fruit is considered to be a form of Lord Shiva Its greatness has been 
eulogized even by the deities himself. It is believed that all the places of 
pilgrimages, dwell in the Bilva-leaf. Lord Shiva is believed to have his abode in 
the roots of the Bilva tree. A devotee who waters the roots of the Bilva tree 
attains greater virtues than offering water to the deities of all the places of 
pilgrimages. Similarly a devotee who worships the roots of the Bilva tree 
attains to the abode of Lord Shiva. 
Suta then goes on he explain the greatness of Shiva's name and the 
importance of Bhasma (ash) and rudraksha beads in his worship. The name of 
Shiva is as sacred as Ganges. Similarly 'Bhasma' and 'Rudraksha' are as holy as 
the rivers Yamuna and Saraswati. Therefore a devotee who possesses the 
name of Lord Shiva on his lips, who applies Bhasma on his person and who 
wears a rudraksha in his neck attain the virtues similar to that of taking a bath 
in the sangam. In ancient times, a king by the name of Indrayumna got 
liberated from the bondages of the world, just by chanting the name of Shiva. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF BHASMA (ASH) IN SHIVA'S WORSHIP  
Bhasma are of two types:-1) Maha Bhasma and 2) Swalpa Bhasma. 

290 
 



'Shrota' (listener), 'Smart; (rites according to the smritis) and Laukik (worldly) 
are considered to be the Maha Bhasma. There are many types of Swalpa 
Bhasma. 
'Shrota' and 'Smart' are meant only for the Brahmins. For the rest of the 
castes, 'Laukik Bhasma' is appropriate. A Brahmin must apply Bhasma, only 
after initiating it with the mantras. The ashes which remains after burning dry 
cowdung is called Agneya Bhasma. Applying 'Tripunda' on the forehead with 
the ashes after the completion of Yagya, is to the Upanishad rituals like 
Sandhya and Japa should only be performed after applying tripunda on the 
forehead. 
IMPORTANCE OF RUDRAKSHA  
Rudraksha is very dear to Lord Shiva and hence all the sins of a man get 
destroyed if he chants the name of Lord Shiva using a Rudraksha beads. He 
also attains salvation after his death. It is believed that the origin of Rudraksha 
is connected with Shiva penance. 
Once while Sadashiv was performing his penance, his eyes opened due to 
some disturbances. He was so remorseful that tears rolled down from his 
eyes. These tear-drops are believed to be the origin of the Rudraksha trees. 
Rudraksha of specific colours have been prescribed for different castes. For 
example a Brahmin, a Kshatriya, a Vaishya and a Shudra have been instructed 
to put on Rudraksha of white colour, red colour, yellow colour and black 
colour respectively. 
A person who wears eleven hundred Rudraksha on his body, he unites with 
Shiva. Rudrakshas are of various types i.e. Ekmukha Rudraksha (one opening) 
to rudraksha with fourteen openings. 
Each type of rudraksha has specific mantra and specific deity connected with 
it. 
PART TWO RUDRA SAMHITA SRISHTI-KHAND The sages express their desire of 
knowing about the manifestation of Shiva and Uma, their marriage and their 
life as a householder and the other aspects of Shiva's divinity Suta narrated 

291 
 



the story of Narada's attachment and lust - how they were ultimately 
destroyed. He also narrated of Narada's deep desire to know about Shiva. 
VICTORY OF NARADA OVER 'KAMA'  
Once upon a time a Narada was performing a penance in the cave of Himalaya 
mountain. Indra becoming fearful sent Kamadev to obstruct his penance. But 
Kamadeva was unsuccessful in his attempt as the place where Narada was 
doing penance was the same place where Lord Shiva did penance. After the 
completion of his penance, Narada became arrogant that he had defeated 
Kamadeva. He went to Kailash mountain and narrated about his feat to Lord 
Shiva. Narada was naïve not to realize the fact hat is happened only because 
of the divine power of Shiva. 
Lord Shiva listened to his arrogant statement. He advised Narada not to reveal 
this secret to anybody. But Narada went to Brahmaloka and boasted about his 
feet to Lord Brahma. 
Lord Brahma listened to his boisterous statements and advised him not to 
reveal this to anybody. But Narada was not satisfied. He wanted to give the 
news of his achievement to Lord Vishnu. 
So, he went to Lord Vishnu's abode and boasted about his feat of defeating 
Kamdeva. 
Lord Vishnu with a desire to subdue his inflated ego, manifested his illusionary 
power with the blessings of Lord Shiva. 
While Narada was returning from Vaikuntha Loka, he saw a beautiful city. This 
city was ruled by a king named Sheelnidhi. The king had a daughter and her 
Swayamvar was being organised. 
Numerous kings had arrived to take part in that Swayamvar. Narada, curiously 
entered the place were Swayamvar was being held. The king requested 
Narada to study the lines of the palm of the princess. Narada was infatuated 
by the princess‘ beauty. He returned back to Lord Vishnu and expressed his 
desire of marrying that princess. He also requested Vishnu to make him as 
handsome as himself (Vishnu). 

292 
 



Lord Vishnu made Narada's whole body very beautiful except his face. Which 
he made like a monkey. Narada being unaware of this happily went back to 
Swayamvar site. Narada sat among the kings - his face resembling like a 
monkey Lord Vishnu too was present there. The princess saw Narada, whose 
face was looking like a monkey. She was amused. Ultimately she put the 
garland around the neck of Lord Vishnu and went to Vaikuntha Loka alongwith 
him. 
Some of the Shiva's gana too were present there in the guise of a Brahmin. 
Their names were Marud ganas. When they saw Narada to see the reflection 
of his face in the water. 
When Narada saw his face in the water, he saw that he was looking like a 
monkey. He became very furious and cursed the Marudganas to be the born 
as demons, even though being Brahmins by birth. 
Furious Narada then went to Lord Vishnu and cursed him- "You too would 
suffer due to separation from your wife, during your incarnation of Rama and 
the monkey would come to your help. 
Lord Vishnu accepted Narada's curse without any hesitation. He then removed 
the illusionary powers by which Naradas' mind was influenced. Now Narada 
regretted his actions. Lord Vishnu told Narada that everything happened 
because of Shiva's divine illusions. 
"You did not pay heed to his advice and hence Shiva by his illusions, has 
taught you a lesson. 
Shiva is beyond the reach of the three basic qualities -Satva, Rajas and Tamas. 
Therefore you must worship and contemplate on the name of Shiva. All of 
your sins will be destroyed. 
After preaching Narada, Lord Vishnu vanished from his sight. Narada then 
descended down to earth and while having darshan of numerous Shivalingas, 
he saw two of the Marudganas, whom he had cursed. He told both of them 
that they would take birth from a giantess's womb, but their father would be 
sages. He also told them that they would become very famous due to their 

293 
 



devotion, Narada went to Lord Brahma and requested him to tell about the 
divinity of Shiva.  
BRAHMA PREACHES NARADA ON ORIGIN OF VISHNU AND BRAHMA  
On Narada's request Brahma said- "During the period of MahaPralaya (Final 
annihilation) nothing exist, except Shiva. The power which Shiva manifested 
from his own self came to be known as Ambika. This Ambika is understood to 
be the cause of the whole world as well as the Nature. Lord Shiva then created 
a Shivaloka, which is known as Kashi. It is the abode of Shiva and Parvati. A 
man who makes a pilgrimages of Kashi attains salvation. 
Lord Shiva, felt the need of somebody, who could look after the creation in his 
absence, as he wanted to retire along with Ambika at Kashi. The unified 
energy of Shiva and Ambika, resulted into a radiant physical form of a child. 
The child asked Shiva about his name and purpose of his being. 
Lord Shiva named the child as Vishnu and advised him to do a penance which 
would help him to attain all kinds of accomplishment. He then offered him the 
knowledge of Vedas, through his breath. For this reason it has been said- 
"YASYA NISHVASITAM VEDAH " Meaning: Whose exhaled air is Veda. 
Vishnu followed the instruction of Shiva and did a tremendous penance for 
twelve years, but still he was not successful in having a darshan of Lord Shiva 
for the second time. He became worried. 
He heard a heavenly voice, instructing him to do further penance. 
Vishnu then recommenced his penance. It continued for many days. By the 
blessings of Shiva, numerous fountain of streams errupted from his body, 
which spread in all directions in the form of Brahma. Vishnu was very pleased 
to see that stream. He went to sleep in that streams due to which he also 
came to be known as 'Narayan'. One who has his abode in the water. After 
that, all the five elements manifested from his self. The three qualities- Salva, 
Rajos and Tamas as well as the ego manifested from his body. Similarly, five 
Tanmantras (Subtle form of matter), Panchabhuta (Sky water, air, fire and 
earth) and ultimately five sense organs and five organs of action also 

294 
 



manifested from. Altogether twenty-four types of element manifested from 
the body of Sri Vishnu. 
Brahma told Narada- "While Vishnu was sleeping in the water, a lotus flower 
manifested from the navel of Vishnu according to the wish of Shiva. On that 
lotus was seated with four heads. I did not see anything except that lotus 
flower. I had a desire to know about my identity. So I entered into the hollow 
tubular stalk of that lotus flower, but I was not able to find the source. I 
returned back to the same place. Suddenly I heard a voice which instructed 
me to do penance. I did a tremendous penance for twelve years with a desire 
to know about my creator. Being pleased with me, Lord Vishnu manifested 
before me with in his Chaturbhuj form, but I could not identify him, being 
influenced by the illusionary power of Shiva. I quarreled with him."  
SIVA ENDS BRAHMA – VISHNU DISPUTE AND SHABDA BRAHMA 
"I asked him as to who he was. Vishnu replied that he was the fulfiller of all of 
his desires. But I replied to him that I only was the creator, nurturer and the 
supreme soul of this world. Vishnu became angry and said that undoubtedly I 
(Brahma) was the creator of this world, but he (Vishnu) was the one, who had 
created me (Brahma) and the whole world. Vishnu also ordered me to take his 
refuge and promised to protect me. But being an ignorant I did not believe 
him. A fierce battle was fought between both of us. A Shivalinga manifested 
between us to end the battle. We requested that Shivalinga to show its real 
identity. That Shivalinga had destroyed our pride." We heard a sound OM. We 
became curious to know the origin of that sound. Vishnu saw a letter 'A' 
towards the south of that Shivalinga. He also saw the letters 'U' and 'M' center 
towards the north of the Shivalinga and in its center respectively. He also saw 
the mantra 'OM', which was dazzling like a Sun. There was no beginning and 
end to this mantra OM. As we were making efforts to know about its origin, 
suddenly Shiva appeared in the form of a sage. He gave us the knowledge 
regarding OM. He also revealed to us that I originated from the letter 'A', 
Vishnu originated from letter 'U' and Shiva himself originated from letter M. 

295 
 



The letter A signifies creation, U signifies nurturement and M signifies 
salvation. 
The three letters A, U and M also symbolizes the basic causes of creation. A or 
Brahma also symbolizes the semen, U or Vishnu symbolizes the Vagina and 
the sound of OM is Maheshwarthe combined sound of A, U and M. All the 
three united from which manifested a golden egg. 
This golden egg remained submerged in the water for one thousand years. 
The almighty then cut that egg into two halves, from which appeared heaven 
and Earth. We also saw the divine beauty of Maheshwar." Then we saw all the 
vowels and consonants emanating from the physique of Mahadeva. Vishnu 
saw the forty eight letters within OMKAR, which in fact were the two 
following mantras- "TAT PURUSHAY VIDDYAMAHE MAHADEVAY DHIMAHI, 
TANNO RUDRAH PRACHODAYAT." And "TAT SAVITUR VARENYAM BHARGO 
DEVASYA DHIMAHI DHIYO YONAH PRACHODAYAT.”  
“After that we also received the Mahamrityunjay mantras like 'OM JOOM 
SAH", "HRAUM HRIM JOOM SAH" and "TRAYAMBAKAM YAJAMAHE". After 
that we received the five lettered mantra "OM NAMAH SHIVAY", the 
chintamani mantra 'KSHAMYAUM', the Dakshainamurti mantra - "OM NAMO 
BHAGAVATE DAKSHAINAMURTAYE MAHYAM MEGHAM PRAYACHCHHA 
SWAHA. At last we received the great mantra TATVAMASI. 
Vishnu was so enchanted by this mantra that he started chanting this mantra. 
We then prayed to Shiva-the creator, the nurturer and the destroyer. "Shiva 
became very pleased with both of us. He preached us the contents of Veda. 
Shiva told Vishnu about the methods by which his (Shiva's) worship could be 
done. He revealed to us that Vishnu actually had manifested from the left 
portion of his Shiva's body and myself from the right portion of his body. He 
also blessed us that he would manifest his incarnation of Rudra from our body 
and also that the purpose of this incarnation would be to do annihilation. Lord 
Shiva revealed to us that his consort Uma, was in fact mother Nature and her 
power in the incarnation of Saraswati would be my consort. Lakshmi, who 
would also manifest from the nature would be the consort of Vishnu." Brahma 

296 
 



told Narada:- "Lord Shiva informed us that my day consists of four thousand 
eras and similarly my night too consists of four thousand eras. Since a month 
consists of thirty days and a year consists of twelve months. In this way my 
age was fixed to be of one hundred years. One day of Vishnu is equivalent to 
one year of Brahma. Vishnu's age too was fixed to be of one hundred years. 
The day of Rudra is equivalent to one year of Vishnu and his age also was fixed 
to be of one hundred years. 
THE METHODS OF WORSHIPPING SHIVA  
On the request of the sages, Suta retold the preaching which had been 
narrated by Brahma to Narada. Describing the method of Shiva worship he 
says- "A devotee should get up early in the morning and contemplate on 
Shiva, who gives benediction. 
After that, he should finish his daily routing work and perform rituals like 
'Sandhya' and Vandana etc. After that, he should worship Shivalinga according 
to vedic rites like Panchopachar, Sodashopachar etc. He should also perform 
'Abhiseka' with various offerings. At last, the should beg pardon for his sins."  
Once, Brahma went to 'Kshirsagar' (the abode of Vishnu) accompanied by the 
deities and asked Lord Vishnu how a man could be liberated from his sorrows. 
Lord Vishnu told them that this objective could be met by worshipping 
Shivalinga. 
All the deities, then prayed to Lord Shiva, who after becoming pleased 
instructed 'Vishwakarma' to construct a Shivalinga for them. Vishwakarma 
then made a Shivalinga for Kubera, a Shivalinga of yellow diamond for 
Dharmaraj, a Shivalinga of dark coloured diamond for Varuna, a Shivalinga of 
Indraned diamond for Vishnu and a goldden Shivalinga for Brahma. Similarly 
Vishwadeva was given a Shivalinga made up of silver, the Ashwini Kumars 
were given Shivalinga made up of bronze, Lakshmi was given a Shivalinga 
made up of Crystal (Sphatik), Sun-God was given a Shivalinga made of copper 
and the moon was given a Shivalinga made of pearl. 

297 
 



Brahma has described the following methods for the worship of Shivalinga- 
"After performing the rituals like 'Achaman' and Pranayama a devotee should 
apply a tripunda on his forehead and wear a rudraksha on his body. After the 
study of Shanti-path and the performance of Devata-Namaskar, he should 
make a resolution if he has any wish to be fulfilled. 
Then the worship of Shivalinga should be done, with the help of Mahima-
Stavan and offering flowers to the Shivalinga. The purity of the mantras should 
be maintained while chanting them. 
It has been mentioned in the ShivaPurana that making offerings in the form of 
lotus, Shatapatra, Shankhapushpi, the leaves of wood apple tree, helps a man 
in attaining wealth and prosperity. 
For becoming free from disease, fifty lotus flowers should be offered to the 
Shivalinga. 
Mrityunjay-Japa should be chanted for five lac times, for all types of 
accomplishment. One lakh dhatura-fruits should be offered for long life, 
worldly-pleasure, as well as for attaining salvation. 
THE ORIGIN OF KAILASH AND VAIKUNTH  
Brahma revealed to Narada how the process of creation commenced- "After 
Lord Shiva vanished from our sight, I transformed myself into the appearance 
of a swan and Vishnu transformed his appearance into that of a boar with the 
purpose of commencing the process of creation. First of all, I created the 
water. I poured a palmful of water into it and an egg manifested which 
consisted of all the twenty four elements. This egg was very enormous in size 
which made me confused. I did penance for twelve years. Vishnu appeared 
before me. I requested him to bring that egg to consciousness. Vishnu entered 
into that egg. As a result of this, Kailash mountain, and all the seven worlds 
came into existence. After that the static living things were created, which 
symbolized the dark quality (Tamas guna). After that I created four footed 
animals like cows and Ox etc. inspite of these creations, I was not satisfied, so 
I again went into meditation. 

298 
 



As a result the deities were created which symbolized the virtuous quality 
(Satvaguna).  
Once again I meditated and the human species came into existence, which 
symbolized the medium quality (Rajas guna). With the permission of Lord 
Shiva, I then created spirits like ghosts etc. 
After that I created my five Manasputras- Sanak, Sanadan etc. But they were 
so ascetic and detached from the world that they showed their disinclination 
in contributing in the process of creation. This made me angry, tears rolled 
down from my eyes. With the permission of Vishnu, I did a tremendous 
penance to have a darshan of Lord Shiva. 
THE EMERGENCE OF RUDRAVATAR AND CREATION  
Brahma said to Narada- "When I accomplished my penance, Lord Shiva 
manifested in his incarnation of Rudra from in between the eyebrows. Half of 
his body resembled like that of a woman (Ardhanarishwar). I requested him 
help me in my creational activities. Rudra created his hosts (Rudragana) who 
resembled like him. I requested him to create the mortals, to which he 
laughed and said, that he liberated mortals from their sorrow, so how could 
he fasten them with bondages. Rudra requested me to create the mortals and 
then he vanished. 
Preaching Narada on the essence of Shivatattva, Brahma said-"With the 
permission of Shiva, I created the five basic elements from which the matter is 
made and also all types of arts. I also created the time. Despite all these 
creations, I was not satisfied. I created Sage Marichi from my eyes, Sage 
Bhrigu from my heart, Sage Angira from my head, Sage Pulaha from my Vyan 
Vayu, Sage Pulatsya from my Udan Vaya, Sage Vashishtha from my Saman 
Vayu, Sage Kratu from my Apan Vayu, Sage Atri from my ear, Daksha Prajapati 
from my vital air. You (Narada) manifested from my lap. Sage Kardam and 
Dharma manifested from my Shadow. Then I divided my body into two parts, 
and from each of the two parts. Manu and Shatarupa manifested respectively. 
Both of them got married and in this way commenced the conjugal creation. 

299 
 



Priyavrata and Uttanpad were the two sons born to them. Shatarupa also gave 
birth to three daughters whose names were Akuti Devahuti and Prasuti. Sage 
Ruchi was married to Akuti, Sage Kardam was married to Devahuti and Daksha 
Prajapati was married to Prasuti. 
Sage Yagya and Dakshaina were born to sage Ruchi and Akuti.”  
“Numerous daughters were born to sage Kardam and Devahuti. Similarly 
twenty-four daughters were born to Daksha and Prasuti. Daksha married 
thirteen of his dhauthers to Dharma. 
The rest of his daughters were married to sages like Pulastya etc. All the three 
worlds are inhabited by the progenies of these sages. The same Daksha 
Prajapati had sixty daughters in another Kalpa, who were married to sages like 
Kashyapa, etc. In this Kalpa, 'Sati was one of his daughters who was married to 
Lord Shiva. 'Sati' being distressed by the disrespect sown by her father-
Daksha, to her husband-Shiva, had given up her life, by jumping into the 
sacrificial fire. In her next birth she was born as Parvati and was again married 
to Shiva. This way, I created this world with the permission of Shiva."  
GUNANIDHI - THE BRAHMINS' SON  
Narada asked Lord Brahma, when did Lord Shiva make Kailash as his abode 
and what was the reason of friendship between Shivaji and Kubera. Brahma 
narrated the following story- - There used to live a Brahmin by the name 
Yagyadutt in Kampilyanagar, who was proficient in the performance of 
Somyagya. He had a son named Gunanidhi. Though he was a scholar but at 
the same time he was irreligious and kept bad company. He used to indulge in 
evil activities like gambling. 
His father - Yagyadutt was unaware of his evil activities. Whenever he asked 
his wife about Gunanidhi habits and conduct, his wife used to tell lies and 
praised the conduct of Gunamidhi. 
Thus Gunamidhi's condition became worst day by days. 

300 
 



Yagyadutt married Gunanidhi with a girl belonging to a well to do family. But 
his habits had not changed. His mother tried her best to make him 
understand, but it was of no avail. 
One day Yagyadutt saw, a gambler wearing his ring. He asked him about that 
ring. The gambler told him that his son - Gunanidhu had lost it to him, in the 
gamble. He also informed him that he had also lost numerous ornaments and 
other properties in the gamble. 
Yagyadutt became very angry. He married with another woman after 
abandoning his wife and son. When Gunadhi came to know about his father's 
second marriage, he moved to another place, cursing his fate. He kept on 
walking till he became tired. He sat under a tree and started thinking about his 
further course of action. He heart was full of remorse and he repented for his 
past actions. As his mind was engrossed in such kind of thoughts. He saw 
somw villages going towards temple. They were carrying prasad in their 
hands. 
"Since Gunanidhi was hungry, he followed them and after reaching the temple 
he sat at the main gate of the temple. IN the night, after the accomplishment 
of the Pujan, the devotees went to sleep. Gunanidhi entered the premise 
went to sleep. Gunanidhi entered the premise of the temple. 
The flame of the lamp was gradually becoming dim as the result of which he 
could not see properly. He tore some pieces of cloth, he was wearing and 
made a thick wick and put it in the lamp. Now the light was sufficient to 
enable him to see whatever had been offered to the deity.”  
“He carried as much fruits and other eatables as possible and tried to sneak 
out from the temple. 
Unfortunately, he dashed against a devotee woke up and chased him shouting 
thief-thief.”  
“Hearing his cries all the other devotees woke up and caught Gunanidhi. He 
was given such a nice thrashing that proved to be fatal and as a result 
Gunanidhi died." The Yamadut's arrived to take his soul to yamloka. But right 

301 
 



then, the Shivaganas arrived and prevented the Yamadutas from carrying his 
soul. They informed the Yamdutas that Gunanidhi was entitled for Shivaloka 
as he had devoutly observed the Shivaratri fast, had listened to the tales of 
Shiva and lighted up the lamp which was about to go off. The Shivaganas also 
informed the Yamadutas that, in his next birth Gunamidhi would become the 
king of Kalinga.”  
“In this way Gunanidhi attained to Shivaloka. In his next birth he was born as a 
son of king Arindam- the king of Kalinga. He was named as Dama.”  
“When he was still young, his fatherArindam dies. So Dama succeeded him as 
the king of Kalinga. He renovated all the Shiva temple, which came under his 
jurisdiction and passed a decree which made the worship of Lord Shiva 
compulsory for all the subjects. By the blessings of Lord Shiva, he became the 
king of Alkapuri and was known as Kubera.”  
“During the Padma kalpa, Sage Vishrawa was born to sage Pulastya- the 
manasputra of Lord Brahma. Vishrawa's son - Vishrawan ruled over Alkapuri 
for a long time. This city was constructed by the deity Vishwakarma. 
Vishrawan was a great devotee of Lord Shiva.”  
“During the kalpa named Meghawahan, Gunanidhi did a tremendous penance 
for ten lac years. As a result of this penance his body was reduced to skelton.”  
“Lord Shiva became very pleased with him and appeared before him, 
accompanied by his consort Parvati. He told Gunanidhi to ask for any boon, 
which will be fulfilled.”  
“When Gunanidhi heard Shiva's voice he opened his eyes, but his eyes were 
dazzled by the sheer radiance of Lord Shiva. He requested Shiva to restore the 
power of sight in his eyes. Shiva blessed him, as a result of which he was now 
able to see the divine sight of Lord Shiva. But he became jealous of Uma, who 
was present by the side of Shiva. He was wondering as to who was this lady, 
dearer to Shiva than him. He glanced cruelly towards her. As a result of this his 
left eye lost the power of sight.”  

302 
 



“Parvati asked Lord Shiva as to why was this sage (Gunanidhi) looking cruelly 
towards her. Shiva replied- "He is none other than your son. He is looking at 
you in astonishment as he his bewildered at the feats achieved your 
penance.”  
“Lord Shiva then blessed Gunanidhi to become the king of the kings. He also 
assured him that he will always be present in the vicinity of Alkapuri. After 
being blessed by Shiva, Gunanidhi also made salutations to Parvati. 
Parvati said- "Since you have looked at me angrily your hatred and enemity 
(Bair) towards me was clearly visible. For this reason you will be known as 
Kuberas." After blessings, Gunanidhi both Shiva and Parvati to a place called 
Vaishveshwar. Kailash mountain was situated near Alkanagri. 
SHIVA GOES TO KAILASH  
When Rudra - the Ansha of the Almighty Brahma, heard about the 
tremendous penance, Kubera was doing he started to play his 'damaru' 
(drum), the sound of which reached all the three worlds. 
Rudra then reached the place where Kubera was doing penance.”  
“Hearing the sound of his damaru, all the deities including Brahma, Vishnu and 
Sadashia appeared before him.”  
“When Kubera saw Lord Rudra before himself, he offered his seat to him and 
worshipped him. 
He also worshipped the other deities. Rudra was so pleased with Kubera that 
he decided to stay near him. He called Vishwakarma and ordered him to 
conduct his abode at Kailash mountain, so that he could live in could live in 
the vicinity of his great devotee Kubera. Kubera constructed a beautiful city as 
per his instruction. An auspicious moment was chosen and Shiva went to live 
at Kailash mountain. He was coronated by the deities." Brahma in this way 
told Narada about Shiva's departure to Kailash mountain. 
SATI KHAND  

303 
 



In the Sati Khand of Rudra-Samhita, Narada enquires Lord Brahma about the 
reason, why Lord Shiva married Sati, inspite of being a 'yogi'. He also 
requested Brahma to tell, how Sati became the daughter of Daksha Prajapati 
and in her next birth as Uma the daughter of Himalaya. How did Uma get Lord 
Shiva as her husband?- asked Narada Lord Brahma narrated the following tale- 
"A girl by the name of Sandhya manifested from my being. I was amazed by 
her heavenly beauty. Right then a divine entity appeared before me, whose 
beauty could not have been matched even by the deities. He was Kamadeva- 
the God of love. He influenced me to such an extent that I forgot that Sandhya 
was my daughter and got infatuated by her.”  
“When Rudra came to know about my lust for Sandhya, he admonished me 
and ridiculed about my character. I felt ashamed. But I also became jealous of 
Rudra. I decided to influence him with the power of infatuation, but I was 
unsuccessful in my attempts. I remembered Lord Vishnu and he tried to make 
me understand about the futility of my attempts, as according to him 
(Vishnu), Rudra was beyond the reach of any human emotions.”  
“But I instructed my son - Daksha to help in the procreation of a girl child from 
the womb of Ashwinivirini. Thus Sati was born. Sati later on became famous of 
Uma and got Rudra as her husband on account of her tremendous penance.”  
“Though Rudra was free from all kinds of attachment, but still he became so 
influenced by the desire for procreation that he married with Sati. He enjoyed 
a blissful married life for a very long time.”  
“Rudra father in law, Daksha in his arrogance started condemning his son in 
law -Rudra.  
Once, Daksha organised a grand yagya ceremony. He gave invitation to 
everybody except Rudra and Uma. Despite of Rudra's disinclination to allow 
Sati to go to her father's yagya, She insisted and ultimately she was successful 
in convincing Rudra, to allow her to go.”  

304 
 



“When Sati reached there, she was not given respect by her father Daksha. 
Not only this, Daksha made fun of Rudra. Feeling dishonored, Sati gave up her 
life by jumping into the sacrificial fire.”  
“When Rudra got the news of Sati's death he became extremely furious. To 
take revenge, he created Veerbhadra from his locks of hair. Veerbhadra went 
to Daksha place and destroyed his oblation site. He severed Daksha's head. All 
the deities became afraid and prayed to Rudra, to have mercy. Rudra then 
brought back Daksha to life and helped him the accomplished of the still 
incomplete Yagya. The site where Sati had died later on became famous as 
Jwalamukhi Devi.”  
“The same Sati in her next birth was born as Parvati to Himalaya. By her 
tremendous penance she again got Lord Shiva as her husband. 
After that Lord Brahma told Narada about the manifestation of Kama, the God 
of love. 
MANIFESTATION OF 'KAMA' WHO IS CURSED BY BRAHMA  
"When I became infatuated by the divine beauty of Sandhya, my infatuation 
resulted into the manifestation of my another Manas-putra named Kamadeva. 
His beauty and qualities were incomparable. His manifestation not only 
inflicted me with lust, but also my other Manasputras became filled up with 
lust. Kamadeva made salutations to me and asked as to what was his name 
and purpose of being. I gave him the name 'Pushpavan' and instructed him to 
help in the process of procreation. I also blessed him that nobody would 
remain unaffected by his influence including myself and Vishnu." After being 
named by Lord Brahma as 'Pushpavan', Kamadeva was also given various 
names as Manmath, Kama, Madan etc by sages like Mareech, etc. They also 
said to him that he would be married to 'Rati' the daughter of Daksha. 
Kamadeva himself was infatuated with the beauty of Sandhya. To test the 
authenticity of Brahma's boon, Kamadeva took out his five arrows and wanted 
to examine their power. The names of their arrows were Harshan, Rochan, 
Mohan, Shoshan and Maran. 

305 
 



These arrows had effect on all the people present there including Lord 
Brahma and Sandhya. 
Getting affected by those arrows, fourty nine types of thoughts emerged in 
Brahma's mind. 
Similarly, flaws were clearly visible in Sandhya's behaviour. 
Kamdeva became convinced of his powers and capabilities. But Dharma - the 
manasputra of Brahma was saddened by this event. He prayed to Lord Shiva. 
When Lord Shiva saw the condition of Brahma, he became amused and made 
fun of him and his Manasputras. Everybody was ashamed. 
Due to his shame, Brahma perspired profusely. From his perspiration were 
created the Pitraganas. Similarly from the perspiration of Daksha Prajapati 
was created the most beautiful woman Rati. 
Brahma was very angry with Kamadeva because of whom he was ridiculed by 
Shiva. He cursed him and said- "You would be charred to death by the arrow 
of Shiva." Kamadeva became very scarred and said that he was only testing 
the authenticity of his boon and he had no other evil intention. He also 
requested Brahma, not to curse him. 
Feeling Pity on him, Brahma consoled him that, although he would definitely 
get killed by the arrow of Shiva's sight, yet he would regain his physical body 
as soon as Shiva get's married. 
Lord Brahma then went to Brahmaloka. 
Daksha requested Kamadeva to get married with his daughter Rati. Kamadeva 
was very pleased at this proposal. Both Kamadeva and Rati got married. 
SANDHYA DOES PENANCE AND GETS BOON FROM SHIVA  
Sandhya was very ashamed of herself. For the atonement of her sin she 
decided to do penance. 
She went to Chandrabhaga mountain and commenced her tremendous 
penance. 

306 
 



Lord Brahma then instructed Vashishtha to go to her in disguise and help in 
getting her initiated. 
He went to Chandrabhaga mountain in the guise of a Brahmin and gave the 
mantra - OM NAMAH SHANKARAYA OM to her and also told her the methods 
of doing worship, then he returned back. 
After sage Vashishtha who was disguised as Brahmin went away. Sandhaya 
did penance as per his instructions. After the passing of one Chaturyuga, she 
had a darshan of Lord Shiva. Shiva being pleased by her devotion asked her to 
demand anything. Sandhya said- "Nobody should have lust towards the 
member of his own clan. There should be no virtuous and chaste woman 
greater then me in this whole world. Anybody other than my husband who 
looks at me with evil intentions become an impotent man." Lord Shiva blessed 
her by saying- 'Evamastu!' Lord Shiva then categorised the life-span of a man 
into four parts - childhood, adolescence, youth and old age. He than told her 
that it was written in her destiny to die by burning. He also advised her to go 
and surrender her body in the sacrificial fire of the yagya, performed by 
Medhatithi. "Before jumping into the sacrificial fire, just remember anybody, 
whom you want as your husband, and your wish would be fulfilled in your 
next birth, when you would take birth as a daughter of Daksha Prajapati. Your 
father Daksha Prajapati would marry his 27 twenty daughter to Moon, but the 
moon would have affection only towards Rohini and rest of his wives would 
be neglected by him. For this reason he would be cursed by Daksha. All the 
deities would take your refuge." After blessing Sandhya in the way Lord Shiva 
went back to Kailash mountain. 
SANDHYA BORN AS ARUNDHATI AND MARRIES SAGE VASHISHTHA  
When Lord Shiva went away. Sandhya got up and went to the place where 
Medhatithi was performing his yagya. She made a mental resolution to have 
that Brahmin as her husband, who in reality was Vashishtha and then entered 
into the sacrificial fire. The fire of the yagya burnt her body and carried it ti the 
solar-system, where it was divided by the sun-God into three parts and 
established in his chariot. The names of these three parts were Pratah-

307 
 



Sandhya, MadhyanhaSandhya and Sayam-Sandhya. Sandhya‘s vital force was 
absorbed by Lord Shiva. 
When the yagya ended, the sages were surprised to see the presence of a girl, 
who was radiating like gold in the sacrificial fire. They took out that girl child 
from that yagya-kunda. The sages then brought up that girl with love and 
affection. She was named Arundhati. 
When she attained the age of five, Brahma Vishnu and Mahesg arrived and 
married her with Vashishtha. Arundhati enjoyed a happy life and became 
famous for her chastity. 
Brahma told Narada that since the day he was humiliated by Shiva, he had 
grudges against him and wanted to take revenge. "I wanted to subdue the 
arrogance of Shiva by proving it to him that even he could be binded by 
attachment. I asked Daksha and sages like Mareech as to how this feat could 
be achieved. As a result 'Rati' and 'Kama' manifested. I instructed Kama to 
influence Shiva by his powers. Kama agreed but requested me to create a 
suitably divine women for Shiva. 
Myself and Daksha became worried and during that time we exhaled fragrant 
air through our nostrils, which resulted into the creation of spring season. The 
spring season was looking divinely beautiful in her physical form. I handed 
over her to Kama and thus all the three of them (spring season, Kama and 
Rati) went to influence Lord Shiva who was in his deep state of meditation. 
CREATION OF MARGANAS AND KAMA'S FUTILE ATTEMPTS  
Kama tried his best to bring Lord Shiva under his influence. All the living 
creatures were spell bound by his powers except Lord Shiva and Ganesha. 
Kama returned back to Brahma ad told him about his unsuccessful attempts. 
Brahma sighed heavily. From his sighes were created the ferocious ganas. 
These ganas were shouting ''araymaray''(kill-kill). 
They even tried to attack Lord Brahma, Kama then pacified the anger of these 
ganas. These ganas were named as Mar. 

308 
 



Lord Brahma then sent these ganas to Shiva along with Kama and Rati to give 
it a second try. 
Once again their attempts went futile. All of them returned to Lord Brahma 
and expressed their inability in influencing Shiva. 
Lord Brahma then remembered Vishnu, who appeared instantaneously. 
Brahma revealed about his intentions to him. LordVishnu told him that it was 
foolishness on his part to have enemity towards Shiva. But when Lord Brahma 
kept on insisting, he revealed to him that this could be only achieved by the 
blessings of Goddess Parvati. Lord Vishnu said- "If she becomes pleased with 
you, then she could help you in achieving your goal by taking birth in a human 
form and having Shiva as her husband. Instruct Daksha to do penance so that 
Parvati takes birth in his house."  
DURGA BORN AS DAKSHA'S DAUGHTER SATI  
After Lord Vishnu went away, Lord Brahma started meditating on the form of 
Goddess Durga. 
She appeared before him. Lord Brahma said- "I need your help in binding 
Shiva with your maya." Goddess Durga told Brahma that Lord Shiva in his 
incarnation of Rudra was beyond the reached of any kind of Maya. But when 
Brahma kept in insisting then Goddess Durga agreed to help him in his effort. 
She said- "I will take birth as the daughter of Daksha Prajapati and try to 
please him by my penance." After assuring Lord Brahma she vanished. Lord 
Brahma too went to his abode. 
With the permission of Lord Brahma, Daksha did penance for three thousand 
years. As a result Goddess Jagdamba appeared before him. She blessed him by 
saying that she would take birth as his daughter and by her tremendous 
penance would attain Rudra as her husband. But she warned Daksha that if he 
showed any kind of disrespect to her, she would end her life. 
With the permission of Lord Brahma, Daksha Prajapati created many thing just 
by his mental resolution. But finding the absence of any kind of evolution and 
development in them, he went to Brahma to take his advice. 

309 
 



Brahma instructed him to create by the help of copulation. Daksha Prajapati 
then married Asikti - the daughter of Panchajan. Ten thousand sons, including 
Haryasya were born to them, but all of them were directed by Narada to 
follow the path of salvation. 
After that, Daksha married Panchajani from whom were born thousand of 
son, but all of them followed the path of salvation and were not interested in 
creation. Narada was instructed in changing their mind. 
Daksha Prajapati became very furious with Narada and cursed him to become 
an eternal wandered. He said- "You will never remain at a place for long." 
When Lord Brahma came to know about Daksha Prajapati's anger towards 
Narada he went to him and cooled him down. Subsequently sixty daughters 
were born to Daksha. He married his ten daughters with Dharma, thirteen 
daughters with Kasyap. Twenty seven daughters with Moon, two daughters 
with Bhutangiras, two daughters with Krishashva and the remaining six 
daughters with Garuda. Daksha mediated on the form of Bhagawati, and was 
instructed by her to do penance. Daksha did a tremendous penance and thus 
was born Uma to Daksha and Virani. Uma was brought up with great love and 
affection. Uma used to worship Lord Shiva by singing devotional songs in his 
praise. 
SATI DOES PENANCE—SHIVA MARRIES SATI  
When Sati attained marriageable age, Daksha started worrying. Sati 
understood the reason behind her father's worried. She went to her Mother 
Virani and expressed her desire of marrying Lord Shiva. 
Her mother made all the arrangements so that Sati could worship Shiva 
without any problem. 
Sati commenced her austerity named Nandavrata which continued for a year. 
Being impressed by her austerities, all the deities descended down from 
heaven to see her. 

310 
 



All the deities and the sages requested Lord Shiva to get married, but Shiva did 
not want to curtail his freedom by getting married. When the deities insisted 
he told them to find a suitable match for him. 
Brahma and Vishnu told Shiva about the tremendous penance Uma was doing 
to him (Shiva) as her husband. They also requested him have to go to her 
(Uma) and fulfill her desire. Lord Shiva agreed. After Uma had accomplished 
her penance named Nandavrat, Lord Shiva appeared before her and asked her 
to demand anything. Uma because of her shyness could not say anything. Lord 
Shiva knew about her desire so he said- "You will have me as your husband." 
Uma's face beamed with joy, but she shyly requested Lord Shiva to keep this 
proposal before Daksha. Shiva agreed and said- 'Tathastu'. He then went back 
to his abode- Kailash. 
Sati narrated the whole story to her parents. Both of them became very happy 
with this news. 
Lord Shiva then instructed Brahma to put a formal proposal to Daksha 
regarding his marriage with Sati. Lord Brahma went and informed Daksha 
about Lord Shiva's proposal. Daksha was very happy at the proposal. Brahma 
then came back to Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva was anxiously waiting for his arrival. When Lord Brahma arrived he 
curiously asked about Daksha's response. When Lord Brahma told him about 
Daksha's approval of the marriage. 
Shiva was very pleased at this. 
Lord Shiva proceeded towards Daksha's abode on the auspicious moment of 
Phalgun, Krishnapaksha and on the thirteenth day of Phalguni Nakshatra. 
Sitting on the back of Nandi and accompanied by all the deities including Lord 
Brahma, Vishnu he reached Daksha's residence. 
The marriage-procession was received by Daksha with great respect. Shiva 
narrated Sati in an auspicious lagna. Being pleased, all the deities eulogised 
Shiva and danced in joy. 
LORD BRAHMA FACES THE WRATH OF SHIVA  

311 
 



Daksha presented invaluable things to his daughter- Sati as dowry. Similarly 
the Brahmins were presented with large quantities of wealth. 
Lord Brahma was enchanted by the divine beauty of Sati. With a desire to see 
her face, he put logs of wood which were wet, into the yagni kunda and 
poured ghee on them. As a result the atmosphere was filled up with smoke. 
Now Brahma removed the piece of cloth which covered her face. He became 
infatuated by her beauty. When Lord Shiva discovered about his evil 
intentions he ran towards him menacingly. Lord Shiva wanted to kill him, but 
the deities prayed to spare his life. Lord Vishnu eulogised and worshipped him 
and only then his anger was subdued. Thus Lord Brahma was forgiven by 
Shiva. 
Though Lord Shiva had forgiven Brahma, yet he instructed him to apologize by 
bowing down his head. Brahma did as he was instructed Lord Shiva then 
established on his head. Brahma became ashamed and asked as to how could 
he atone for his sins. Lord Shiva instructed Brahma that by worshipping him 
he could appropriately atone for his sins. He than instructed Brahma to go to 
the earth where he would be worshipped as 'Rudra Shir'. Shiv said- "Your 
worship would help the Brahmin in accomplishing every kinds of work. Taking 
lessons from you people would not dare to have extramarital affairs. After 
reaching Kailash mountain, Lord Shiva instructed all his ganas (attendants), 
not to disturb them (Shiva and Shakti). When all the ganas went away Shiva 
and Shakti enjoyed a blissful union for twenty five Deva-years. 
When the rainy season arrived, Shakti requested Shiva to make a residence in 
such a place to that they could not be disturbed by rain etc. Lord Shiva smiled 
and said- "Dear Sati! The clouds and rain will not dare to disturb if you are 
present by my side, no matter whereever we live - even if we live on the peaks 
of Himalayas. 
Sati requested him to make Himalaya as his abode. Lord Shiva agreed and 
both if them shifted to their new abode at Himalaya, where they lived for ten 
thousand 'Deva-years'. 

312 
 



IMPORTANCE OF DEVOTION IN KALI YUGA  
Sati requested Lord Shiva to enlighten her mind by giving discourses. Shiva 
revealed to her the importance of devotion in the Kali Yuga. He said that the 
value of knowledge (jnana) and asceticism (vairagya) would diminish to the 
extent of extinction in the era of Kali and only devotion would help a man in 
attaining liberation. Lord Shiva said- "I had burnt the time (Kala) for the 
benefit of the devotees, with my third eye. For the sake of my devotees, I 
even abandoned Ravana without any partiality. For the welfare of my 
devotees, I even instructed Nandi to punish sages Vyasa, who was exiled out 
of Kashi." Shiva preached on many topics like types of devotion, yantra, 
mantra, scriptures etc. 
SATI'S DOUBT ABOUT SRI RAMA Devarshi Narada who was listening to the 
divine tales of Shiva, narrated by Lord Brahma with rapt attention, requested 
him to describe about other characteristics of Shiva. Brahma said- " 
Once, Lord Shiva accompanies by Sati, arrived at Dandak aranya, where Sri 
Rama was wandering in search of Sita, who had been abducted by Ravana. 
After walking for some time Lord Shiva saw Sri Rama and Lakshman. Lord 
Shiva made salutations to Sri Rama. Sati was surprised at Shiva's behaviours. 
She asked Lord Shiva about the reason he made salutations to Sri Rama. Shiva 
told Sati that he (Sri Rama) was his deity and an incarnation of Lord Vishnu. 
But Sati was not satisfied by this reply. She wanted to test, whether Sri Rama 
was really an incarnation of Lord Vishnu or not. She disguised herself as Sita 
and went to Sri Rama. But Sri Rama recognised her real identity and addressed 
her as Mother. Sati was ashamed but asked Sri Rama as to why did Shiva 
made salutations to her." Sri Rama narrated the following story- 
Once, Lord Shiva requested Vishwakarma to construct a grand palace and a 
magnificent throne for him. When everything was ready, Shiva invited all the 
deities for the crowning ceremony of Lord Vishnu. 
Lord Vishnu was requested to be seated on the throne and was worshipped by 
all the deities including Shiva himself. He assured Lord Vishnu that all of his 

313 
 



(Vishnu's) incarnations would be shown respected by his (Shiva's) devotees. 
Rama was the incarnation of Vishnu." Sati was now completely satisfied. She 
was also ashamed of herself that she had doubted Shiva's words. She went to 
Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva stopped looking at Sati, as her consort, because she had 
personified herself as mother Sita. This fact was even corroborated by a 
heavenly voice. Now Sati's heart was filled up with sorrows. 
She followed disenchanted Shiva to the Kailash mountain, where he 
commenced his meditation and went into Samadhi. She sat down without 
saying a word. When Lord Shiva came out from his Samadhi, he saw her stire 
sitting their. He felt pity on her and drove away her guilt and sorrows, by 
giving discourses. 
DAKSHA'S ANIMOSITY TOWARDS SHIVA— PERFORMS YAGYA  
Once, the sages organised a yagya at Prayaga, which was attended by all the 
deities. Lord Shiva too had come, accompanies by Sati. He was eulogized and 
worshipped by all the deities and the sages. 
Daksha arrived there and after making salutations to Lord Brahma sat down 
without showing any kind of respect to Shiva. After that, all the deities and the 
sages came and made salutations to Daksha, but Shiva sat where he was 
sitting. 
The ignorant Daksha cursed Shiva that from now onwards his (Shiva's) share 
would not be kept in the yagya. 
At this Nandi- the vehicle of Shiva became very angry and cursed Daksha that 
from today onwards the Brahmins would fail to understand the essence of 
Vedas. 
Lord Shiva then pacified Nandi's anger and both of them went back to their 
abode. Daksha too went back to his place and started having hatred towards 
Shiva. 

314 
 



Daksha organised a yagya at 'Kanakhal' in which everybody except Shiva and 
Sati were invited. 
Sage Dadhichi arrived and not finding the seat for Shiva went back, saying that 
it was impossible to accomplish a yagya without Shiva. 
Then Daksha commenced the yagya with the assistance of other sages who 
were present there. When Sati saw all the deities going happily, she became 
curious to know where they were going. 
She requested her companion to ask the moon as to where he was going in 
such a cheerful mood. 
The moon told her companion that they were going to attend the yagya 
ceremony, being organised by Daksha. 
Sati was very surprised at this information. She went to Lord Shiva and sought 
his permission to go there. Lord Shiva then told Sati that her father did not 
invite them because of the animosity he was having towards him (Shiva). 
Sati became very furious and decided to go there to know about the reason 
why Daksha was performing the yagya without inviting her husband-Shiva. 
Shiva sent Nandi and other rudraganas as her escorts. 
SATI'S DISHONOR—GIVES UP LIFE When Sati reached, where Daksha was 
performing his yagya, she met her mother and sisters. 
They met her with all the respect and honor. But Daksha did not even caste a 
glance at her. Imitating him many other people did the same. But Sati not 
bothering about the disrespect shown to her made salutations to both her 
parents. 
When she reached near the yagya-mandap she saw that shares of all the 
deities was there except that of Shiva. She became furious and asked her 
father as to why was Shiva not invited to the yagya. 
Daksha then made fun of Shiva and cursed him. This made her more angry 
and she declared that she would give up her life in everybody's presence. 
After the declaration her mind was engrossed by the thoughts of Shiva. 

315 
 



Sati then sat in padmasan and closed her yes. By her yogic powers she united 
with Shiva and her lifeless body fell into the yagya-kunda. This incident 
shocked everybody and the rudraganas furiously picked up their weapons. 
Right then a heavenly voice was heard. 
"O mean Daksha! Share on you! You are a sinner and a fool. Now you are 
certain to face the wrath of Shiva. Because of your act, the deities too will 
have to suffer." Daksha became scarred. He immediately eulogising Lord 
Vishnu. 
VEERBHARDA CUTS OFF DAKSHA'S HEAD When Nandi informed Shiva about 
Sati's death, he became very furious. He angrily pulled out a lock of hair and 
dashed it against the mountain, which got divided into two parts. From one 
part manifested the valiant Veerbharda and from the other part Mahakali. 
Veerbhadra and Mahakali were instructed by Shiva to destroy the yagya of 
Daksha and to kill all the people who were present during the time of Sati's 
death, including the deities and the sages. 
After getting the instructions from Lord Shiva, Veerbhardra marched with a 
huge army which included the mighty Shivaganas like Dakini, Bhairav and 
Kapalish etc. Goddess Kali to joined him with her army which consisted of all 
her nine incarnations like Katyayani etc. As the army marched on numerous 
auspicious signs were visible. 
On the other hand Daksha experienced many inauspicious signs. His left eye, 
left army and left thigh started throbbing. He saw the vultures flying over his 
head. He heard the sounds of jackals howling. 
Daksha then prayed to Lord Vishnu to rescue him from the imminent wrath of 
Lord Shiva. Lord Vishnu preached Daksha and said- "Daksha! Since you have 
committed the greatest sin by dishonoring Shiva and Sati. Even I can not 
prevent the calamities which you are certain to face." As Lord Vishnu was 
preaching Daksha suddenly there was a loud commotion. The army of 
Veerbhadra had arrived. Daksha was frightened and again prayed to Vishnu to 
save his life. 

316 
 



Lord Vishnu again expressed his helplessness and told him that because of him 
all the deities too would have to suffer. 
A terrible battle was fought between the armies of Veerbhadra and the 
deities. The deities got defeated and fled away. They went to Lord Vishnu and 
sought his help. Lord Vishnu decided to fight on the side of the deities. 
The battle recommenced for the second time. Lord Vishnu having a dual fight 
with Veerbhadra and the deities were fighting against his army. 
Suddenly everybody heard a heavenly voice which said that Veerbhadra was 
invincible. Hearing this, Lord Vishnu and Brahma went to their respective 
abodes. 
Daksha ran for his life and hid himself behind the attar where the yagya was 
being performed. 
But Veerbhadra pulled him out from there and severed his head. He then 
threw his head in the agni-kunda. After this he returned back to Kailash 
accompanies by his army. 
KSHUVA–DADHICHI FIGHT AND VISHNU–DADHICHI FIGHT  
Narada, who was listening to the divine tales of Shiva with rapt attention, was 
very curious to know about the reasons why Lord Vishnu attended a yagya 
where Shiva was not invited and why did he fight a battle against Veerbhadra 
despite knowing about his invincibility. Lord Brahma told him that all this 
happened due to the curse of Sage DadhichiIn the ancient times, there used to 
live a king named Kshuva, who was a great friend of Sage Dadhichi. Due to 
some reasons both of their developed animosity towards each other. Dadhichi 
considered himself superior because of being a Brahmin, on the other hand 
Kshuva considered himself superior on account of his wealth. The dispute took 
a worst turn and Dadhichi punched him on his head. As a result Kshuva felt 
down unconscious. When he regained his consciousness he struck sage 
Dadhichi with his weapon named Vajra, which injured Dadhichi. 
Dadhichi sought the help of Shukracharya. Shukracharya healed his wounds by 
his mantras. He also taught Dadhichi the mahamrityunjay mantra. Dadhichi 

317 
 



then did a tremendous penance to please Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva appeared 
before him and blessed him with three boons, they were 1) his bones, would 
become as hard as lightning (Vajra), 2) he would not be killed, 3) he would 
never be humiliated. 
Armed with these three boons, Sage Dadhichi again went to fight Kshuva. He 
kicked him, in return Kshuva too attacked him with his weapon named Vajra, 
but it did not have any effect on Dadhichi as his bones had become as hard as 
lighting. 
King Kshuva did a tremendous penance to please Lord Vishnu. Vishnu revealed 
to him that Dadhichi had become immortal because of the blessings of Lord 
Shiva, but assured him that he would certainly help him in defeating Dadhichi. 
Lord Vishnu then visited the hermitage of Sage Dadhichi, disguised as a 
Brahmin. On being asked by Dadhichi about the purpose of his arrival, he said 
that he had come with a desire of a boon on his heart. 
Sage Dadhichi, by his yogic power came to know about the real identity of a 
'Brahmin'. He told that he had been caught. Lord Vishnu was ashamed. 
Lord Vishnu then went back to Kshuva and instructed him to go to sage 
Dadhichi and act as if he had accepted his superiority. 
"Kshuva went to sage Dadhichi and did as he was instructed to do, but 
Dadhichi did not believe his words. Now Lord Vishnu became angry and tried 
to kill him by his sudarshan chakra, but he was not successful, as the chakra, 
which was given to him by Lord Shiva himself, was not willing to harm a 
devotee of Shiva. 
"Lord Vishnu then tried to kill Dadhichi by shooting volley of arrows. The 
deities too attacked with their weapon. Sage Dadhichi threw a handful of 
Kusha grass, initiated with mantras towards them, which destroyed all the 
weapons of the deities.”  
“In the meantime Lord Brahma arrived on the scene accompanies by Kshuva. 
He told the deities that it was futile to fight with Dadhichi as he was invincible, 
due to the boon given by Lord Shiva.”  

318 
 



“Ultimately King Kshuva begged his forgiveness for his offence. Dahichi 
forgave him but cursed Vishnu including all the deities that they would be 
burnt to ashes by the wrath of Rudra.”  
“This was the reason why all the deities and Lord Vishnu attended the yagya, 
organised by Daksha and got defeated by Veerbhadra."  
DAKSHA REVIVED AND YAGYA COMPLETED  
The deities after being defeated by Veerdbharda went to Brahmaloka and 
narrated everything about the destruction of Daksha's yagya and also how his 
head was severed by Veerbharda. 
Brahma became very sad. To bring Daksha back to life and to accomplish the 
still unfinished yagya, he went to Lord Vishnu to take his help. All the deities 
accompanied him. Lord Vishnu told them that it was wrong on the part of 
Daksha to have shown disrespect to Shiva. The deities were wrong to support 
him. Lord Vishnu then went to Kailash mountain, accompanied by Lord 
Brahma and all the other deities. All of them eulogized and worshipped Shiva. 
They also requested him to bring Daksha back to life. 
Lord Shiva became very pleased and agreed to make Daksha alive. All of them 
went to Kanakhal where Daksha had organised the yagya ceremony. 
Veerbhadra accompanied them. When they reached the site, Lord Shiva could 
not hold his laughter after seeing the destruction of the site. 
Anyway, he joined the head of a goat to the torso of Daksha's body and made 
him alive. He also compensated for all the losses which had been caused by 
the destruction. All the deities became very pleased and they eulogised Shiva. 
Becoming pleased by the invocation and eulogy of the deities, Lord Shiva 
preached Daksha in the following way- "The person who has the right 
knowledge (jnani) is the supreme among all human beings. An action which is 
performed in one's ignorance and jealousy does not liberate a man from his 
world bondages. 

319 
 



O Daksha then accomplished his yagya singing the praise of Lord Shiva. He 
also give lots of donation to the Brahmins. They everybody returned to their 
respective houses being fully satisfied. 
Sati, the daughter of Daksha was reborn as Gauri, the daughter of Himalaya 
and Maina. By her tremendous penance she again had Lord Shiva as her 
husband. 
PARVAT KHAND  
HIMALAYA MARRIED MAINA  
Narada requests Lord Brahma to shed light on the birth of Maina and also too 
she was married with Himalaya. Brahma said- "After relinquishing her body, 
Sati, the daughter of Daksha attained to the abode of Shiva. In her next birth 
she was born to Maina, the wife of Himalaya and was known as Parvati. Maina 
had done great service to Sati in her previous life considering as her own 
daughter. For this reason she was blessed and got Parvati as her daughter. 
Parvati did tremendous penance and got Lord Shiva as her husband." 
Continuing with his story Brahma said- " 
Once Himalaya, the king of the mountains, decided to marry with the desire of 
expanding his lineage. The deities came to know about his desires and so they 
went to the Pitras and requested them to give their daughter - Maina, so that 
Himalaya could marry her. The Pitras agreed at this proposal. Thus Maina got 
married wih Himalaya. After the marriage ceremony the deities returned back 
to their respective abodes. 
Daksha had sixty daughters, 'Swadha' was one of them and was married to the 
Pitras. In due course of time three daughters were born to them - Maina, 
Dhanya and Kalawati.  
Once all the three of them went to Swetadweepa to have a darshan of Lord 
Vishnu. Right then, sages like Sanak, Sanadan etc arrived there. Everybody 
present there stood up in reverence, but Maina, Dhanya and Kalawati could 
not identify who they were and hence they remained sitting. Not only that, 
they did not even make any salutations to them. 

320 
 



The sages became angry and cursed them to be born as humans in their next 
birth. Maina, Dhanya and Kalawati became very afraid and requested to be 
pardoned. 
Sages Sanak feeling pity on them told that Maina would become the wife of 
Himalaya, in her next birth and give birth to Parvati, Similarly Dhanya would 
be married to king Janaka and Sita would be born to them, similarly Kalawati 
would be married to Vrishbhan and Radha would be born to them. Sage Sanak 
also told them, that in this way all three of them would attain to the heaven. 
Brahma told Narada that after getting married with Maina, Himalaya enjoyed 
a happy married life for a long time. 
Once, Lord Vishnu paid a visit to his place, accompanied by all the deities. 
Himalaya was very pleased by his arrival. After making salutations, he asked 
for the purpose of their visit. 
The deities revealed to them that very soon the incarnation of Sati - Parvati is 
going to take birth. 
"Therefore, O Himalaya! Be prepared for that glorious occasion." Said the 
deities. 
Himalaya was very pleased at this news. The deities started invocating Uma. 
Being pleased by the invocation made by the deities Goddess Uma assured 
the deities about her arrival in this world. She told that her incarnation would 
take place in the house of Himalaya and by the virtues of her tremendous 
penance she would get Lord Shiva as her husband. She also told the deities 
that she was satisfied by the service of Maina, done to her in the previous life. 
After being assured the deities went back satisfied. 
BIRTH OF PARVATI  
Himalaya and Maina commenced their penance with the objective of getting 
Uma as their daughter. Maina did a tremendous penance which lasted for 
twenty-seven years. 

321 
 



Goddess Uma became very pleased by her penance. She appeared before her 
and asked her to demand anything she wished for. Maina expressed her 
desire of having one hundred valiant sons and a daughter, who would be 
worshipped by the people in all the three worlds. 
Goddess Uma blessed her by saying Tathastu. Maina narrated this incident to 
her husband Himalaya. He became very pleased. In due course of time one 
hundred sons were born t o Maina. 
One of the sons was Mainak who possessed supreme qualities. Due to some 
reasons, Indra had severed the wings of Mainak's ninety-nine brothers, but by 
taking the refuge of ocean Mainak was able to survive the assault of Indra's 
Vajra. 
Himalaya and Maina engaged themselves in the worship of Shiva and Shakti, 
day and night. 
After some days Parvati manifested herself by taking birth. After her birth the 
whole mountaneous region of Himalaya became illuminated by her radiance. 
After taking her birth, Parvati gradually started growing up. Varioua names 
given to her like Girja, Uma, and Jagdamba. Himalaya and Maina felt proud of 
their fate, which had made them the parents of an incarnation. Seeing the 
childhood plays of Uma, their hearts knew no bounds. 
One day sage Narada arrived there Himalaya requested him to study the palm 
of Parvati, as he was curious to know about her future. After studying the lines 
of the palm, Narada predicted that Parvati was destined to be the wife of an 
entity, who would be beyond the reach of all the three qualities. He also 
revealed to them, that her husband would be devoid of any flaws and would 
be self born-Rudra. 
Narada told Himalaya that to have Rudra as her husband, Parvati will have to 
accomplish great austerities and penance. Narada then went away. 
When Uma had attained the marriagable age, Maina requested her husband a 
suitable bridegroom for her. Himalya told her that the words of Narada would 

322 
 



never go in vain hence Uma should be asked to do penance, so that she could 
have Rudra as her husband. 
But Maina was disinclined in forcing her tender daughter - Parvati in to such 
hardhsips like penance. Parvati then told Maina about her dream, in which she 
had seen a Brahmin instructing her to do penance in order to have Rudra as 
her husband. 
Maina told Himalaya about Parvati's dream. Himalaya then revealed to Maina 
about his own dream, in which he had seen Lord Shiva doing penance at 
Kailash mountain. He had tried to give Parvati to him (Shiva) was unwillingly to 
have her service. But Shiva ultimately changed his mind after being satisfied 
by Parvati's replies. 
Himalaya said- "I saw in my dream that Parvati had pleased Shiva by her 
tremendous penance and ultimately both of them got married. Maina was 
satisfied and waited eagerly for that auspicious moment. 
THE BIRTH OF 'BHAUM'- MARS  
Once, when the ganas of Shiva praised the glory of mother Sati, Lord Shiva 
became overjoyed just like an ordinary human being. In his joy, he travelled all 
around the three world without any clothes on his body. He returned back to 
Kailash and went into meditation. 
While he was engrossed in his Samadhi, three drops of perspiration originated 
from his forehead fell down on the earth. From those drops manifested a very 
beautiful infant, who was of reddish complexion and who had four arms. 
Seeing the child Lord Shiva became concerned about his upbringing. Right 
then, mother earth manifested and Lord Shiva entrusted the job of child's 
upbringing. The child was brought up by mother earth with great love and 
care. The child was named 'Bhaum' as he was nurtured and brought up by 
'Bhumi' (earth). 
When the child grew up, he went to Kashi and did a tremendous penance to 
please Lord Shiva Lord Shiva became pleased with him and blessed him by 

323 
 



granting him 'Mangalloka', which was superior even to the 'Shukraloka'. The 
same 'Bhauma' is established in the solar system by the name of 'Mars.'  
SHIVA ARRIVES AT HIMALAYA AND CONVERSATION WITH PARVATI  
One day Lord Shiva accompanied by his ganas like Bhringi, Nandi, etc, arrived 
at Himalaya, with the purpose of doing penance. When Parvati father 
Himalaya came to know about his arrival, he went to receive him. After he had 
made his salutations to Shiva, he was instructed by Shiva to see that he is not 
disturbed while doing his penance. 
Himalaya made all the necessary arrangements so that Lord Shiva could 
perform his penance without being disturbed. One day Himalaya arrived at 
the place where Lord Shiva was doing his penance. Parvati too came along 
with him. Himalaya requested him to keep Parvati, so that she could be at his 
service. Lord Shiva declined to keep her with him, fearing her presence might 
cause hindrance in the path of his penance. Now, Himalaya became very 
concerned about his daughter's future and wandered whether Parvati would 
remain unmarried. 
When Parvati saw her father becoming worried by Shiva's response she 
decided to intervene. She said to Lord Shiva-"I am 'Prakriti' (Nature) and you 
are the 'Purusha' (almighty). You exist in the 'Sagun' form (with form) because 
of me. In my absence, you will find it impossible even to exist." Lord Shiva was 
impressed by her knowledge. He allowed her to be present near her. Himalaya 
and Parvati became very pleased. 
Parvati used to come daily at the place where Lord Shiva was doing his 
penance. Her companions too used to come along. She used to engaged 
herself in the worship of Lord Shiva with great devotion. 
Though Lord Shiva was very much impressed by her devotion, but he decided 
that he won't marry her until she has proved her mettle by her tremendous 
penance. 
The deities were tormented by a demon named. Tarakasur. They went to Lord 
Brahma to seek his help. Lord Brahma sends 'Kamadeva' to disturb the 

324 
 



Samadhi of Shiva, so that being influenced by him Shiva married Parvati and 
ultimately kills Tarakasur. 
This attempt of Brahma was unsuccessful. Shiva 'burnt' Kamadeva with the 
help of his third eye. 
Parvati, then redoubled her effort to attract the attention of Shiva by engaging 
herself in a tremendous penance. 
THE BIRTH OF VAJRANG  
Narada was curious to know about Tarakasur. He asked Brahma to narrate his 
tale. 
Brahma said- "Kashyapa-the son of Marichi, had thirteen wives Diti was the 
eldest among them. She was the mother of Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha. 
Both her sons were killed by Lord Vishnu in his incarnations of Nrisimha and 
Varaha respectively. Diti became very sad by the death of her sons. 
After somtime she again became pregnant but the foetus was destroyed by 
Indra's weapon- Vajra in the womb itself. However Indra was not able to 
destroy the foetus completely, but was only successful in dividing the foetus 
into forty-nine parts. These forty-nine parts, later on became famous as 
'Maraudganas'. 
Again Diti gave birth of Vajrang, who was very valiant and brave. When he 
grew up, Diti ordered him to defeat the deities. With his mother's permission 
and blessings, Vajrang defeated the deities and held them captive. He 
fastened all the deities. With strings and himself became the king of heaven. 
Seeing the pitable state of the deities I (Brahma) went to Vajrang 
accompanied by Kashyapa and requested him to free the deities. Vajrang 
agreed to free them but said he did not have any aspiration of becoming the 
king of heaven, he only wanted to teach a lesson to Indra. Vajrang returned 
the heaven to the deities. Later on the married Varanji who had been created 
by me (Brahma). While Vajrang was of virtuous nature, Varangi was met."  
BIRTH OF TARAKASUR AND HIS PENANCE  

325 
 



Varangi gave birth to Tarakasur, the valiant and brave demon. During the time 
of his birth, the world was affected by inauspicious events like earthquakes, 
cyclones etc. His name Tarakasur was given by Kashyapa. 
After he grew up, Tarakasur went to Madhuvan to do penance. His 
tremendous penance scarred the deities. Becoming pleased by his penance, 
Lord Brahma appeared before him and asked him to demand anything. 
Tarakasur demanded two boons - there should be no man as powerful as him 
and except Shiva's son nobody should be able to kill him. Lord Brahma blessed 
him by saying 'Tathastu'. 
After receiving the boons, Tarakasur returned back to Ronitpur and was 
crowned as the king by Shukracharya. He then defeated the deities and drove 
them out from the heaven. Now it came under the rule of the demons. 
After being driven away from the heaven, the deities went to Lord Brahma to 
seek his help. They asked him as to how they could get rid of this menace 
called Tarakasur. 
Brahma revealed to the deities that Tarakasur could be killed only by such a 
person, whose parents are Shiva and Parvati. He also advised them to make 
efforts, so that Shiva agrees to marry Parvati. 
Lord Brahma them went to 'Tarakasur' who had now become the king of 
heaven, and tried to convince him to return it back to the deities. Tarakasur 
agreed to relinquish the heaven and give it back to the deities. The deities 
went back to the heaven. 
KAMADEVA REDUCED TO ASHES BY SHIVA  
Lord Brahma told Narada that the deities decided to send Kamadeva to 
influence Lord Shiva so that the marriage between him and Parvati is 
felicitated. 
Indra called Kamadeva and told him that the demon king Tarakasur could be 
killed only by such a person who was the son of Shiva and Parvati. Indra 

326 
 



instructed Kamadeva to arouse passion in Lord Shiva, so that he agrees to 
marry Parvati. 
Kamadeva, accompanied by his wife Rati went to Lord Shiva to accomplish his 
mission. 
After reaching the place where Lord Shiva was engrossed in his meditation, 
Kamadeva made repeated attempts to arouse passion in the heart of Lord 
Shiva, but his actions were no avail. Right then, Kamadeva saw Parvati arriving 
accompanied by her companions. She was looking divine in her beauty. Just at 
that moment Lord Shiva too had come out of his meditational trance. 
Kamadeva thought that it was the most appropriate moment to have a go. 
Kamadeva struck Lord Shiva with his 'Kamabana' which did have a deep 
impact on him. Lord Shiva was struck by the awesome beauty of Parvati and 
his heart became full of passion for her. 
But at the same time he was surprised at the sudden change in his behaviour. 
He realized that it was an act of Kamadeva. 
Lord Shiva looked all around him. He saw Kamadeva standing towards his left 
side, with a bow and arrows in his hands. Now he was fully convinceed that it 
was indeed an act of Kamadeva. 
Kamadeva became terrified, he started remembering God, but before the 
deities could come at his rescue the third eye of Lord Shiva got opened and 
Kamadeva was reduced to ashes. 
Parvati got scarred after seeing Lord Shiva in such a destructive anger. She 
went to her house along with her companions. Rati- the wife of Kamadeva 
wept unconsolably. 
The deities arrived and consoled her by saying that by the grace of Lord Shiva, 
her husband would be alive once again. After that the deities went near Lord 
Shiva and did his worship. They told him that it was not the fault of Kamadeva, 
as he had acted in accordance with the aspirations of the deities. They also 

327 
 



told him the mystery of Tarakasur's death. The deities then requested him to 
make Kamadeva alive once again. 
Lord Shiva told the deities that Kamadeva would take birth as the son of 
Krishna and Rukmini in the era of dwapar. A demon by the name of Shambar 
would throw him off in the sea. He would kill that demon and marry Rati, who 
too would be living in a city near the sea. 
But the deities were not satisfied. They requested Lord Shiva to help Rati to 
unite with her husband. Lord Shiva then told them that Kamadeva would 
become his gana, but he also warned them against revealing this fact to 
anybody. Rati then went to the city where the demon Shambar was expected 
to appear in the era of dwapar. The deities too went back to the heaven. 
Lord Shiva's anger did not subside after the death of Kamadeva and the whole 
world started to feel the wrath of Lord Shiva's fury. All the living creatures 
became terrified. They went to Lord Brahma and prayed to him, to save them 
from Shiva's wrath. 
Lord Brahma went to Lord Shiva and conveyed their request to him. Lord 
Shiva agreed to relinquish his anger. Lord Brahma then carried Shiva's 'fury' to 
the sea and went to the sea. He requested the sea to posses it until the final 
annihilation. The sea agreed to do this. This way Lord Shiva's fury entered into 
the sea and all the living creatures felt a sign of relief. 
NARADA PREACHES PARVATI DOES PENANCE 
When Parvati reached her home, she became very sad as she was unable to 
bear the sorrow of Shiva's separation. Sage Narada arrived there. Her father 
Himalaya narrated the whole story to him Sage Narada then gave the five 
lettered mantra - "OM NAMAH SHIVAY' to her and he also instructed her to do 
penance. Parvati heart was filled up with new enthusiasm. 
After taking the permission of her parents and relinquishing all of her 
ornaments and royal apparels, Parvati went to the same place where Lord 
Shiva himself had done penance. This sacred place was situated at the 

328 
 



Himalayas, from where the holy Ganges originated. Parvati companions too 
had accompanied her. 
Parvati commenced her penance which gradually became severer day by day. 
She did penance for three thousand years by chanting the five lettered 
mantra- OM NAMAH SHIVAY and performing other kinds of austerities. 
Becoming impressed by her tremendous penance even the deities flocked to 
see her. Parvati did her penance, surrounded by fire on all her sides during 
summer. In rainy season she did her penance without any shelter and during 
winter she used to do penance by immersing herself in neck deep water. 
Parvati's power created such heat in the atmosphere that the whole world 
started to burn. All the deities and sages went to Lord Brahma and told him 
about the effects, Parvati's penance was having on all the three worlds. 
Lord Brahma accompanied by all of them went to Vishnu. They visited the 
place where Parvati was doing her penance. They realized that Lord Shiva was 
the only remedy and hence all of them went to Lord Shiva and made 
salutations to him. 
Lord Shiva enquired about the purpose of their arrival. Lord Vishnu then 
revealed to him that how distressed and tormented were the deities by the 
activities of the demon - Tarakasur. 
He also told Shiva that he could be killed by such a person, who is born out of 
the parentage of Shiva and Parvati. Lord Vishnu then told Shiva about Parvati's 
penance. 
Initially Lord Shiva refused to comply with their request but when the deities 
continued with their insistence, he ultimately gave his conscent. The deities 
became very pleased. 
PARVATI'S LOVE FOR SHIVA TESTED BY SAPTARISHIS AND SHIVA  
After the deities went back, Lord Shiva summoned the SaptaRishis (Vashishtha 
etc) and instructed them to test Parvati's love for him. The SaptaRishis went to 
Parvati and tested her resolve to marry Lord Shiva. They tried to deter her by 
all means, but Parvati was firm in her resolve. They went back to Lord Shiva 

329 
 



and narrated the whole story. Lord Shiva then himself went to Parvati in the 
guise of a Brahmin. Parvati on seeing a Brahmin welcomed her with full honor. 
Shiva asked Parvati as to why was she doing penance. Parvati told him that 
she wanted to have Shiva as her husband. Lord Shiva, who was in the guise of 
a Brahmin started cursing Shiva to see how Parvati reacted to it. 
Parvati replied that inspite of her penance Shiva did not appear, so she has 
decided to give up her life in burning pyre. After saying like this Parvati 
requested the Brahmin to go back and she herself entered into the burning 
pyre but remained unharmed Lord Shiva was very pleased to see her firm 
resolve and devotion. He again asked her as to what was the purpose behind 
doing such a tremendous penance. 
Parvati told the Brahmin; who in reality was Shiva himself that, she wanted to 
have Shiva as her husband at any cost. She said- "You say that Lord Shiva does 
not possess anything - not even wealth. He does not put on clothes on his 
body. You also say that he is not fit to be a bridegroom of me. But all of your 
utterances prove your mean intelligence." Parvati continuing with her 
statements said that Shiva was the most capable deity in all the three worlds. 
"There is no sin greater than condemning Shiva." said Parvati. 
As Shiva, who was in the guise of Brahmin was about to say something Parvati 
said to one of her companions- "This condemner should be killed, if this is not 
possible then we must leave this place at once." As she was about to leave 
that place, Lord Shiva revealed his true identity and by holding her hand said- 
"You have been my wife since time immemorial where are you going?" Parvati 
became very pleased and her heart was filled up with extreme joy. She 
requested him to take to her father regarding their marriage. Lord Shiva 
agreed. He went back to Kailash mountain and narrated the whole story to his 
Ganas - Nandi, Bhairav etc. Everyone became very happy and awaited eagerly 
for the day Shiva would marry Parvati. 
SHIVA DEMAND PARVATI AS HIS CONSORT  

330 
 



Parvati, after successfully accomplishing her penance came back to her home. 
Everybody was happy at her arrival. 
After sometime Himalaya went out to take his bath in the river Ganges. 
Meanwhile Lord Shiva arrived in his appearance of Nataraj and started 
dancing in front of Parvati's mother Maina. She was so pleased by his dance 
that she wanted to present jewels to him in appreciation, but Shiva refused to 
take them. He expressed his desire to marry Parvati, which made Maina 
furious. In the meantime, Himalaya arrived and she informed him what Shiva 
had said. He became angry too and ordered his attendants to drive away 
Nataraj (Shiva) from that place. Shiva then showed his divine appearance due 
to which Himalaya had the vision of Lord Vishnu and Parvati sitting by the side 
of Lord Shiva in him. Himalaya was very surprised. 
Lord Shiva again demanded Parvati to be made as his consort, but Himalaya in 
his ignorance again refused it. Nataraj then returned back to his abode. 
After Shiva went back, Himalaya had a feeling that perhaps it was Lord Shiva 
himself, who had arrived in the appearance of Nararaj. He realized what a 
grave blunder had been committed. 
Because of their guilt consciousness, both Maina and Himalaya felt the 
germination of devotion in their heart. 
Indra and the other deities became afraid when they saw both Himalaya and 
Maina having deep devotion towards Lord Shiva. They apprehended that if 
Himalaya happily agrees to marry Parvati with Shiva, then he would no longer 
live on the earth- He would attain salvation. His departure would make the 
earth devoid of jewels and other kinds of wealth. 
To prevent this from happening, they went to Brihaspati and requested him to 
influence Himalayas mind by condemning Shiva. But Brihaspati refused to 
comply. 
The deities then went to Lord Brahma and made the same request. Brahma 
refused to meet their demand. 

331 
 



Now the deities went to Lord Shiva and requested him not to marry Parvati as 
it would make the earth devoid of all kinds of wealth. Lord Shiva feeling pity 
agreed to help them. 
Lord Shiva went to Himalaya in the guise of a hermit and started cursing 
himself (Shiva). Maina was deeply influenced by the hermits word and 
decided not to marry Parvati with Shiva. She also threatened to give up her 
life along with Parvati. If Parvati was married with Shiva against her wish. 
Lord Shiva summoned the SaptaRishis and instructed them to convince Maina 
and Himalaya to marry Parvati with him, so that Tarakasur could be killed. He 
feared that his actions would have created many misconceptions in their 
minds. 
The SaptaRishis went to Himalaya and tried to make him, so that Tarakasur 
could be killed. He feared that his actions would have created many 
misconceptions in their minds. 
The SaptaRishis went to Himalaya and tried to make him understand that 
there was not any other way out than marrying Parvati with Shiva. They also 
warned both Himalaya and Maina if they did not give their conscent to marry 
Parvati with Shiva, then she would be forcibly abducted by him (Shiva), 
causing death and destruction to their whole clan. The SaptaRishis then 
narrated the following storyANARANYA - THE KINGThere was a king named 
Anaranya, who belonged to the lineage of fourteenth ManuIndrasavarni. 
He was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. He had five queens from whom one 
hundred sons and a very beautiful daughter named Padma were born. 
When Padma grew up, the king started looking for a suitable match. One day 
while Padma was taking her bath in the Bhadra river, sage Pippalada arrived 
there. He became enchanted by Padma's beauty. 
After gathering informations about her from the people, he went to king 
Anaranya and expressed his wish to marry Padma. He threatened him of dire 
consequences if she was not married to her. 

332 
 



Anaranya became frightened and gave his daughter to him. Sage Pippalada 
happily went away accompanied by Padma. But both the king and the queen 
went to the forest because of the sorrow of giving their young daughter to an 
old sage. The queen died because of her grief. The king, because of his deep 
devotion towards Shiva attained to the abode of Shiva. 
PADMA AND PIPPALAD  
On the request of Himalayas, Sage Vashishtha who was one of the SaptaRishis 
narrated the story of Padma the princess and sage Pippalad- "At the time of 
his marriage sage Pippalad was old and weak, but still Padma devotely 
performed the duties of a faithful wife. 
To test her faithfulness towards her husband, Dharmaraj arrived at the bank 
of that river where Padma was taking her bath. He was in the guise of a young 
and handsome prince. He coaxed Padma to leave behind her 'old husband' 
and come along with him. Padma became furious and cursed him. Dharmaraj 
became very pleased and revealed his true identity. He also asked as to how 
the effects of her curse could be nullified. 
Padma told her that his sins would result in having four legs during the era of 
Satya, but they reduced to three during the era of treta, which would again 
reduced to two legs during the era of Dwapar and ultimately he would have 
only one leg during the era of Kali. Padma also told her that even his single leg 
would disappear during the ending phase of Kali. "This would apropriately act 
as an atonement for your sins." - said Padma. 
Dharmaraj blessed her by saying that she would have ten sons and also that 
her husband would possess youth and long life for eternity. 
After listening to this story. Himalaya agreed to marry Parvati with Shiva. The 
SaptaRishis then went back to Lord Shiva and gave the good news to him. 
Himalaya then requested sage Garga to prepare a beautiful Lagna-Patrikas 
which were then sent to his near and dear ones. He then requested 
Vishwakarma to construct a beautiful 'mandap' for the marriage, which was 
constructed by him in a very short time.  

333 
 



LORD SHIVA'S MARRIAGE PROCESSION—DIVINE PLAYS  
Lord Shiva invited all of his Ganas to the marriage ceremony. He also 
instructed sage Narada to intimate all the deities, sages and the celestial 
entities. 
After getting the invitation from Shiva everybody started making preparations 
to be a part of Shiva's marriage-procession. The seven mothers- Brahmi, 
Maheshwari, Kaumari, Vaishnavi, Varahai, Aindri and Chamunda dressed him 
up beautifully Shiva then performed all the necessary Karmas to pacify the 
planet. At last this wonderful marriage-procession of Shiva proceeded towards 
the in-laws house. 
Shiva proceeded with his marriage procession which considered of crores of 
his 'Ganas' and deities like Vishnu who were boarded on their vehicles. Even 
Narada and Lord Brahma were present in his (Shiva's) marriage procession. 
First of all, Shiva sent Narada to Himalaya's house to inform him about their 
(marriage procession) arrival. Himalaya sent his son Mainak to receive them. 
When Maina saw that the marriage procession was coming she curiously told 
Narada about her desire to see her son in law. 
Shiva understood the arrongance which her desire contained. He wanted to 
teach her a lesson. He sent all the deities one by one. Maina mistook each one 
of them to be Shiva, but was later informed by Narada that in fact they were 
not Shiva but the attendants of Shiva. 
Maina was very delighted and wondered how handsome the master (Shiva) 
must be, if the attendants were so handsome. Right then Shiva arrived with 
his Ganas - His body coated with ashes on it. His Ganas too were looking 
ferocious. Maina could not bear this horrible sight and lost her consciousness. 
The maid servants arrived instantaneously and helped Maina to regain her 
consciousness. She started crying and cursing everybody. She thought was 
responsible for her daughter's marriage with Shiva. Nobody was spared- 
Narada, the SaptaRishis and even her own sons. She even admonished Parvati 
by saying-- "Did you do severe penance to get such a horrible husband like this 

334 
 



(Shiva)?" Lord Brahma and Narada tried to console and convince her, but it 
was of no avail. When Himalaya tried to intervene, he was soundly rebuked. 
Maina threatened him that if this marriage took place then it would be the 
last day of her life. 
At last Lord Vishnu arrived and tried to pacify her anger by saying that her 
anger was baseless as she had not seen the real appearance of Shiva, which 
bestows benediction. Lord Vishnu and Narada then eulogised Shiva who on 
being pleased showed his most enchanting beauty. Maina now became fully 
satisfied. Himalaya too felt proud of her daughter's good fortune. At last Shiva 
entered the Mandap (canopy) where marriage ceremony was going to be 
organised. He saw Parvati sitting there. Both of them were very delighted to 
see each other. 
After the marriage ceremony was over, Sage Garg helped Himalaya in 
performing the rite of Kanyadan, amidst the chantings of vedic mantras. The 
women's were singing auspicious songs. 
Himalaya presented large quantities of dowry to Shiva. Parvati's companions 
were engaged with Shiva in jocular and humorous conversation. 
Rati- the wife of Kamadeva, seeing the moment opportune, arrived and 
requested Shiva to bring back her dead husband back to life. Her wailings 
made the other Goddesses very sympathetic towards her. They too requested 
Shiva to make her dead husband back to life. 
Feeling pity on her condition. Shiva brought back Kamadeva back to life from 
the ashes which Rati had given to him. On seeing her husband alive, Rati's 
heart was filled up with extreme joy. 
Both of them eulogised Lord Shiva and expressed their gratitude. 
After the marriage ceremony was over the marriage-processionist sought the 
permission of Himalaya to make a move, but he requested them to remain 
there for some more days. 
SHIVA'S DEPARTURE WITH PARVATI TO KAILASH  

335 
 



Shiva remained at his in-laws house for many days. One day he sought the 
permission of Himalaya to go back. Everybody became sad at the prospect of 
Shiva's departure. Especially Maina who was very saddened by this news. At 
last it was time for Shiva to depart for Kailash, accompanied by Parvati. 
Lord Shiva and Parvati were blissfully enjoying their martial status, unaware of 
the eagerness with which the deities were awaiting the arrival of their 
progeny. 
Tarakasur - the demon continued tormenting the deities. When their miseries 
became unbearable they went to Lord Brahma to seek their help. All of them 
then went to Lord Vishnu. They told him that even after passing of such a long 
duration of time, Parvati and Shiva had not yet become parents. They 
requested Lord Vishnu to remind Shiva about the purpose behind his 
marriage. 
Initially Lord Vishnu showed his disinclination to disturb Shiva's martial bliss, 
but when the deities insisted he went to Shiva accompanied by all of them. All 
of them eulogised Shiva and Parvati. The deities then requested Shiva to make 
his contribution in the destruction of Tarakasur. 
Shiva understood everything. Some drops of his semen fell down on the 
ground. On being insisted by the deities, Agni transformed his appeared in the 
form of a pigeon and pecked up those drops of semen. Right then Parvati 
arrived there and became extremely furious on seeing the semen going waste. 
She cursed the deities that their respective wives would remain issue less as 
the consequences of their mindless acts. 
Agni was having inflammation in his stomach because of the Shiva's semen. 
Lord Shiva advised him to transfer it into the womb of any noble woman. Agni 
followed the instruction and injected the semen into the body of six women 
through the pores of the hair on their body. 
Those women could not bear the extreme luster of the Shiva's semen. They 
went to Himachal and evacuated it. Even Himachal could not bear its extreme 
effulgence and immersed it into the flowing Ganga. River Ganga carried it with 

336 
 



her current and established it amidst bushes of reed (Sarkanda). 
Instantaneously a beautiful child manifested from it. His birth made all the 
deities extremely joyous including Shiva and Parvati. It was the sixth day 
(bright half of the lunar month) of the Hindu month of Margashirsha. He was 
Kartikeya. 
KARTIKEYA Sage Vishwamitra arrived at the spot where the child had 
manifested. On the repeated insistence of the child, Vishwamitra performed 
his purification rites and named him 'Guha'. 
The divine child blessed Vishwamitra and bestowed divine knowledge to him. 
He also blessed him to become famous as 'Brahmarshi'. Agnideva arrived 
there and gave a divine weapon named 'Shakti' to that child. Guha went to the 
Kroncha mountain and banged his weapon on it. The mountain could not bear 
the effect of the blow and started crumbling down. Innumerable demons 
living on that mountain came to kill him. But the child killed all of them by his 
weapon. 
When Indra heard about his bravery, he came along with other deities to fight 
him Indra assaulted Guha with his Vajra on the right side of his body, which 
resulted into the manifestation of a very powerful entity named 'Shakh'. Indra 
again assaulted him on the left side of his body, from which manifested an 
extremely powerful entity named 'Vishakh'. Indra assaulted Guha for the third 
time- this time his chest was the target. From this third blow of Indra 
manifested 'Naigam'. 
Guha accompanied by all the three powerful entities- Shakh, Vishakh and 
Naigam attacked Indra and his army, but they fled away. 
Six Goddesses arrived on the scene. All of them tried to feed that small child 
out of affection. 
They started quarelling among themselves. Right then they were surprised to 
see the child appearing with six head. Now their problems were solved. Each 
of the Goddesses fed their breast milk to the child. They took Guha with them 

337 
 



and brought him up with great love and care. Guha later on became famous 
as Kartikeya. 
One day, Parvati curiously asked Shiva about his semen which had fallen on 
the ground. Lord Shiva summoned the deities and asked them about it. The 
deities narrated the whole story. Both Shiva and Parvati were very pleased to 
know about Kartikeya. Lord Shiva then ordered his Ganas to bring Kartikeya 
from the possession of Kritika. The Ganas reached Badrikasharama where 
Kritika lived. When Kritika saw the Ganas she became very frightened but 
Kartikeya gave him solace. The Ganas requested Kartikeya to come along with 
him. 
Kartikeya happily took permission from his mothers and proceeded to meet 
Shiva and Parvati. 
At the time or Kartikeya's departure, the mothers had become very 
emotional. Kartikeya consoled them. He then boarded the beautiful chariot 
which had been sent by Parvati and proceeded towards Kailash mountain. 
All the deities including Shiva were eagerly awaiting his arrival. When 
Kartikeya reached Kailash mountain, he was given a royal reception. The 
whole atmosphere was filled up with joy. Everybody was celebrating. Each of 
the deities presented him their respective weapons to him. 
Lord Shiva coronated him as the king with the help of the Brahmin. This way 
he had now become the Lord of Kailashpuri. 
Kartikeya narrated a story connected with himself:- "One day a Brahmin, 
whose name was Narada came to me and requested me to help him find his 
he-goat which had got lost. He told me that the goat was supposed to be 
offered as the sacrifice. 
"If the goat was not found, my vow would remain unfulfilled." Said Narada I 
went in search of that goat. I found it in the Vishnuloka where it was creating 
nuisance. When the goat saw me, it tried to attack me with its sharp horns. I 
climbed on its back. After travelling through all the three worlds, the goat 
returned back to his original place. I climbed down from its back. 

338 
 



Narada arrived and demanded his goat. I told him that his Yagya had been 
accomplished by my blessings and there was no need to sacrifice the poor 
goat. Narada - the Brahmin went back satisfied. 
KILLING OF TARAKASUR  
The deities were very encouraged by the presence of Kartikeya amidst 
themselves. They were beaming with confidence and enthusiasm. The deities 
assembled at the seashore. Tarakasur arrived there with his huge army. The 
battle began. 
Tarakasur appeared to be invincible. His blow was so severe that Indra fell 
down unconscious. 
All the 'Lokpalas' met the same fate. After that Tarakasur fought with 
Veerbharda and made him unconscious. Even Lord Vishnu could not sustain 
for long and was ultimately defeated. 
Lord Brahma requested Kartikeya to fight with Tarakasur as nobody except 
him would be able to kill him. On being instructed by Lord Brahma Kartikeya 
came forward to fight with Tarakasur. Tarakasur ridiculed the deities for 
taking the shield of a small child. 
"If he gets killed by me, the responsibility should lie on you." Thundered 
Tarakasur. 
A fierce battle started between both of them in which both of them got 
injured. At last seeing an opportune moment, Kartikeya hit Tarakasur on his 
chest with his weapon- Shakti. The blow proved to be fatal and as a result 
Tarakasur died. 
Kartikeya feat was hailed by all the deities. After killing Tarakasur, Kartikeya 
went to mother Parvati, who affectionately took him into her lap. He was 
eulogized by all the deities. 
KILLINGS OF PRALAMB AND BANASUR The mountain - Kraunch, who was 
tormented by the activities of the demon named Banasur, went to Kartikeya 
and narrated his woeful tales. 

339 
 



Kartikeya threw his weapon - Shakti in the direction which Banasur lived. The 
weapon banged right on target and returned back to him. Bamnasur was 
burnt to ashes. Kraunch went back being very pleased. The mountain - 
Kraunch established three Shivalingas to please Lord Shiva. The names of 
these three Shivalingas were - Kumareshwar, Pratigyeshwar and Kapaleshwar. 
Once upon a time, the deities were trying to reach the abode of Lord Shiva- 
Kailash mountain. 
Their preceptor Brihaspati was walking ahead of all of them. Meanwhile a 
demon by the name of Pralamb started creating turbulence. After being 
tormented by his activities, Kumud - son of Sheshnag took Kartikeya's refuge. 
Kartikeya killed the demon with his divine weapon - Shakti. 
GANESH  
Once Narada had a desire to listen to the tales of Ganesha. Brahma replied- 
"There were various Ganeshas in different Kalpas. During the period of 
'Shweta-Kalpa', Ganesha was born to Shiva and Parvati, when they went to 
Kailash mountain shortly after their marriage." 
Once while going to take her bath, Parvati instructed Nandi, to stand guard at 
the entrance and not to allow anybody to enter the premise without her 
permission. Lord Shiva arrived there by chance. Despite of Nandi's refusal to 
allow him, in he went inside. Parvati did not like this. 
One day it happened so that  
Once again, Parvati wanted to take her bath. She made an idol from the dirt of 
her body. She made the idol alive and instructed him not to allow anybody 
without her permission. She also gave him a stick for his protection. 
Incidentally Lord Shiva arrived once again. He tried to enter inside but 
Ganesha refused to let him go inside. But when Shiva tried to go inside 
forcibly, Ganesha hit him with his stick. Lord Shiva became furious and 
ordered his ganas to kill him. The ganas of Shiva attacked Ganesha but all of 
them were no match for him. After being defeated by Ganesha, the 
Shivaganas went to Shiva and narrated everything. 

340 
 



While the Shivaganas were narrating their stories, Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu 
and some other deities arrived there. Lord Brahma then went to Ganesha to 
convince him, but as soon as Ganesha saw him he tried to attack Lord Brahma. 
Brahma came back without achieving anything. 
After this Lord Shiva himself came to fight Ganesha. 
SHIVA SEVERS GANESHA'S HEAD –LATER GIVEN ELEPHANT HEAD  
A fierce battle was fought between Shiva and Ganesha. When Lord Shiva 
realized that Ganesha was dominating the fight, he severed his head with his 
trishul. 
Parvati became extremely furious at the death of Ganesha. Her anger resulted 
into the manifestation of innumerable Goddesses, who started creating havoc 
on the deities. 
The deities became frightened and they were forced to take the refuge of 
Parvati. They eulogized her and requested to be pardoned. Parvati told them 
that they could be saved only when Ganesha becomes alive and becomes 
worshippable just like thee (deities). 
The deities went to Lord Shiva and requested him to make Ganesha alive once 
again. Lord Shiva instructed them to go in the northern direction and bring the 
head of any creature they might find and join it with the trunk of Ganesha. 
The deities followed the instruction and went in the northern direction. 
They found an elephant which had only one tusk. They severed the elephant's 
head and joined it with the trunk of Ganesha. By the blessings of Shiva, 
Ganesha became alive once again. The deities worshipped Ganesha and 
returned back to their respective abodes. 
GANESHA'S MARRIAGE  
Both Kartikeya and Ganesha grew up to become handsome youths in due 
course of time. Shiva and Parvati started to think about their marriage. 

341 
 



When Ganesha and Kartikeya came to know about the plan of their marriage 
both of them started quarreling among themselves as to who should get 
married first. 
Lord Shiva and Parvati Devised a plan to sort out this problem. They told them 
that whoever between them return after circumambulating the earth, will get 
married first of all. 
Kartikeya and Ganesha agreed. Kartikeya proceeded on his journey to 
circumambulate the earth. 
Ganesha was very intelligent. He requested his parents - Lord Shiva and 
Parvati; to sit at a place together and circumambulated them for seven times 
and said-"According to Veda, Circumambulating one's parents give virtues 
equivalent to that of circumambulating the whole earth. So now you must get 
me married first." Lord Shiva and Parvati were very impressed by his 
intelligence. They decided to get him married with Siddhi and Riddhi-the 
daughter of Vishwaroop Prajapati. In due course of time two sons were born 
to them Kshem and Labh. 
While Kartikeya was returning after circumambulating the whole earth, he 
met sage Narada on the way. He told Kartikeya about Ganesha's marriage. 
Kartikeya became very sad and felt like having been cheated by their parents. 
When Kartikeya reached Kailash mountain he made salutations to Lord Shiva 
and Parvati and without saying anything, went to Kraunch mountain to do his 
penance. 
Parvati was very sad. She went to Kraunch mountain to meet Kartikeya 
accompanied by Shiva. 
When Kartikeya saw them coming he moved to another place. Lord Shiva and 
Parvati followed him and ultimately met him. Both these places have religious 
significance. Having a darshan of Kartikeya on the full moon day of Kritika 
nakashatra is considered to bestows immense auspicious and destroyes all the 
sins of a man. 
YUDH KHAND TRIPURASUR - THE THREE DEMONS  

342 
 



Narada requested Lord Brahma to narrate how Lord Shiva annihilated the 
demons. Lord Brahma narrated the tale of Tripurasur. 
"After the killing of Tarakasur, three of his sons started doing their penance. 
The eldest among them was Tarkasha, younger to him was Viddyunmali and 
Kamalaksha was the youngest. I (Brahma) became very pleased by their 
tremendous penance.”  
“They requested me to create three invincible forts for them, which should be 
full of all kinds of wealth and splendour and which nobody could be able to 
break.”  
“A golden fort was constructed for Taraksha; for Kamlaksha a fort of silver was 
constructed and for Viddyunmali iron-fort was constructed. I had ordered the 
demon named Maya to construct these forts. One of these forts was 
constructed in the sky, the other was constructed on the earth and the third 
was constructed in the nether world.”  
“After constructing the forts for them Maya took the responsibility of 
protecting them. I (Brahma) warned the three demons that they would be 
killed by Lord Shiva. After this I came back." The three demon-brothers started 
tormenting the deities. The deities went to Lord Brahma and narrated about 
their miseries. Lord Brahma instructed them to seek the help of Shiva. They 
went to Lord Shiva and explained about their woes. They also requested Shiva 
to eliminate those three demons. Lord Shiva instructed them to go to Lord 
Vishnu and said- "The Tripurasurs are very virtuous so they could not be killed. 
You all must go to Lord Vishnu and try to seek his help." The deities then went 
to Lord Vishnu and made the same request. Lord Vishnu performed an 
oblation. Thousands of armed spirit appeared from the yagya-kunda. Lord 
Vishnu sent these spirits to kill the three demon-brothers. But these spirits 
were no match for the Tripurasurs might and they had to run for their lives. 
They came to Lord Vishnu and narrated the whole story. Lord Vishnu became 
very worried. He sent back all the deities and started thinking about the 
means, Tripurasurs could be killed. 

343 
 



Lord Vishnu came to the conclusion that the Tripurasurs could not be killed till 
they remain Virtuous and religious. He then created an illusionary entity from 
his body who had no hairs on his head. He had worn dirty clothes and a bag 
was hanging down his shoulder. He also had a broom in his head. 
The entity asked Lord Vishnu about the purpose of his existence and his name. 
Lord Vishnu told him that his name was Arihan. He also instructed him to 
create a scripture which stresses upon the importance of action (Karmavad) 
and which is different from the rituals explained in the Vedas. Lord Vishnu 
specifically instructed him to keep the language of that scripture as simple and 
degenerated as possible. 
Lord Vishnu then preached Arihan on the science of illusion which stressed 
that the heaven or the hell does not exist anywhere else, but on this earth 
itself. 
Lord Vishnu instructed Arihan to get Tripurasurs initiated into with this 
philosophy so that the demon-brothers become irreligious. Vishnu ordered 
Arihan to make his residence in a desert with his disciples. 
"You should propagate your philosophy when Kali Yuga arrives" - said Lord 
Vishnu. 
After giving his instruction Lord Vishnu disappeared. Arihan then created four 
illusionary entities from his bein who were supposed to act as his followers. 
Their names were Rishi, Yati, Keerya and Upadhyay. 
Now the time had arrived to enter the forts of Tripurasurs. All of them 
entered the forts and in a gradual manner started increasing their influence. 
As a result the Tripurasurs became irreligious. 
Not only that, their subjects too became irreligious in a very short time. 
When the deities saw that the Tripurasurs had become irreligious completely, 
they went to Lord Shiva and requested him to kill Tripurasurs. Right then 
mother Parvati arrived there accompanied by Kartik and Ganesha. She 
requested Shiva to come along with her into the palace. All the deities 
followed them and kept on requesting. The deities were angry that Parvati 

344 
 



had caused obstacles in the fulfillment of their objective. They could not 
conceal their anger and expressed it. 
One of the ganas of Shiva, whose name was Kumbhodar angrily attacked the 
deities. All of them got injured and went to Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu advised 
them to chant the five lettered mantra - OM NAMAH SHIVAY for one crore 
times. The deities followed the instruction. Lord Shiva became pleased and 
appeared before them. He assured the deities that their wishes would be 
fulfilled. 
KILLINGS OF TRIPURASURS When Shiva agreed to kill the demon - brothers 
Tripurasur the deities became extremely joyous. 
They gave their respective weapons to Shiva, so that he did not have any 
difficulty in killing the demons. Vishwakarma gave his beautiful chariot to him. 
Lord Shiva proceeded towards the forts of Tripurasur followed by a huge army 
of the deities. His army entered the forts of his bow but he was not able to 
release it. He remained in this position for one thousand years but still he was 
not successful in releasing his arrow. 
Lord Shiva then worshipped Ganesha and heard a heavenly voice instructing 
him to use his weapon - Pashupat. Lord Shiva released it in the direction of the 
forts of Tripurasur. All the three forts were destroyed by the assault of 
Pashupat and it created havoc among the demons. 
Seeing death and destruction all around them - Tripurasurs prayed to Lord 
Shiva to have mercy on them. Lord Shiva assured them that after their death 
they would be born as his ganas. At last Tripurasurs were burnt to death. 
Maya was the only demon who survived. After their death the Tripurasurs 
were privileged to be reborn as the ganas of Shiva. 
After the killings of three demons- Tripurasur, Lord Shiva's anger had still not 
subdivided. The anger was pacified only after the deities and the sages prayed 
to him. He blessed the deities by saying that he would always be present on 
their side to protect them. 

345 
 



Maya - Who had survived the Shiva's attack, arrived there and he too was 
blessed by Lord Shiva. 
After that Arihan arrived with his followers and worshipped Shiva. Lord Shiva 
blessed him and his followers. After taking permission from Lord Vishnu, 
Arihan proceeded towards a desert region accompanied by his followers. 
After receiving the boon the deities too received to their respective abode. 
LORD SHIVA SPARES THE LIFE OF INDRA Suta narrates the following story to 
the sages- " 
Once upon a time, Indra was going towards Kailash mountain to have a 
'darshan' of Lord Shiva. 
Sage Brihaspati was accompanying him. Lord Shiva came to know about his 
arrival. He wanted to test his devotion towards him. While both Indra and 
Brihaspati were still on their way. Lord Shiva met them on their in the guise of 
a hermit. 
Indra did not recognize Shiva, who was sitting on the way disguised as a 
hermit. Indra inquired as to who he was and where he lived. Lord Shiva sat 
quietly without saying a word. Indra repeatedly asked the same question, but 
each time Shiva remained quiet. Indra became furious and tried to attack Lord 
Shiva with his Vajra. 
Lord Shiva paralyzed the raised hands of Indra by his divine power. Shiva's 
eyes had reddened due to anger which made Indra very frightened sage 
Brihaspati was able to recognize the real identity of the hermit as to who he 
was. He made salutations to Lord Shiva and requested him to pardon Indra. 
Lord Shiva became pleased and diverted the power of his radiant eyes to the 
ocean. 
This way Indra's life was spared by Shiva. Lord Shiva then returned to Kailash 
mountain. Indra and Sage Brihaspati to Kailash mountain. Indra and sage 
Brihaspati too returned to their respective abodes. 
MANIFESTATION OF JALANDHAR  

346 
 



The effulgence, which had been divided by Lord Shiva into the Ocean resulted 
into the manifestation of a small child. This incident happened at the place 
where river Ganges submerged into the ocean and which is also known as 
Gangasagar now a days. 
The child was crying so ferociously that an environment of fear was created 
everywhere. The deities and the sages went to Lord Brahma to satisfy their 
curiously. Lord Brahma assured then to find out the reason. He went to the 
seashore. The sea put the child in his lap and enquired about the name of that 
child and also about his future. 
Meanwhile the child pressed Lord Brahma's neck with such power that tears 
rolled down from his eyes. For this reason he named the child as Jalandhar. 
Lord Brahma told the sea that the child will become the mighty ruler of the 
demons. No deity would be able to kill him except Shiva. 
The sea was very pleased by Lord Brahma's predictions. After Lord Brahma 
returned to his abode, the sea brought that child to his home and brought up 
that child with great love and care. 
When Jalandhar grew up he married Vrinda, who was the daughter of 
Kalnemi. Later on he became the ruler of the demons. 
BATTLE BETWEEN JALANDHAR AND THE DEITIES  
One day Sage Bhrigu came to meet Jalandhar. After receiving him with due 
respect Jalandhar asked him as to who severed the head of Rahu. 
Sage Bhrigu then told him about Hiranyakashipu who was the maternal uncle 
of Rahu. Sage Bhrigu also told him about Virochana - the son of the extremely 
charitable king Bali. Then sage Bhrigu narrated the tale connected with the 
churning of ocean and how ambrosia emerged from the churning of the 
ocean. 
Sage Bhrigu told Jalandhar how Rahu's head was severed by Lord Vishnu, 
while he was sitting among the deities and at the time when ambrosia was 
being distributed to all the deities. 

347 
 



Jalandhar became very furious after hearing this story. He summoned one of 
his messengers whose name was Ghasmar and instructed him to go and ask 
Indra, as to why had he misappropriated all the wealth of his father (Sea) 
which emerged during the churning of Sea. He also instructed Ghasmar to 
warn Indra about the dire consequences unless he takes his (Indra's) refuge. 
But Indra sent back Ghasmar without any specific assurance. This action of 
Indra made Jalandhar more angry than before. He collected his army and 
attacked Indra. 
A fierce battle was fought between his army and the army of the deities. 
Many warriors got killed from both the sides. Shukracharya the guru of the 
deities brought back the dead warriors from the demon side back to life by his 
mritasanjivani vidya. Similarly Sage Brihaspati brought back the dead warriors 
from the deities‘ side back to life with the help of medicinal herbs. 
When Shukracharya saw that, sage Brihaspati too was successfully making the 
dead deities alive, he instructed Jalandhar to submerge the Drongiri mountain 
into the sea, so that it becomes impossible for Brihaspati to get the medicinal 
herbs by the help of which he made the dead deities alive. 
Jalandhar obeyed the command of Shukracharya and by lifting the Drongiri 
mountain submerged it into the sea. The deities became demoralized and fled 
from the battlefield Jalandhar captured Indrapuri. 
The terrified deities took the refuge of Lord Vishnu and sought his help. Lord 
Vishnu gave a patient hearing and agreed to help them, but there was a hitch. 
His consort Goddess Lakshmi considered Jalandhar as her brother because 
both of them originated from the sea. She instructed Lord Vishnu against 
killing Jalandhar. 
Lord Vishnu promised to her that he won't kill Jalandhar. After giving his word 
to Goddess Lakshmi, he went to fight a battle with Jalandhar. 
A fierce battle was fought between both of them which remained indecisive 
till the end. Lord Vishnu became very much impressed by the valiance of 
Jalandhar and asked him to demand any boon he liked. 

348 
 



Jalandhar requested him to make his dwelling in the Ksheersagar-the abode of 
Jalandhar, along with his sister (Lakshmi). Lord Vishnu agreed to fulfill his wish 
and started living in the Ksheersagar along with his consort Lakshmi. Being 
undefeated by Lord Vishnu himself, Jalandhar became the ruler of all the 
three world. All his subjects were satisfied by his just and virtuous rule, except 
the deities. The deities now eulogized Lord Shiva to seek his help in defeating 
Jalandhar. 
According to the wish of Lord Shiva, Sage Narada came to meet the deities. 
The deities narrated their woeful tales to him. Feeling pity on their condition, 
he went accorded a grand reception by Jalandhar which pleased him very 
much. 
Narada praised the splendours and prosperity of Jalandhar but added that it 
was nothing in comparison to Shiva's splendours Narada told him that inspite 
of all his authority and splendours, his prosperity was still incomplete, as he 
did not have a consort. Jalandhar asked curiously as to where could he find his 
consort. 
According to his strategy, Narada advised Jalandhar to make Parvati as his 
consort Jalandhar fell into Narada's trap. He sent 'Rahu' to Lord Shiva with a 
proposal to part with Parvati. Rahu went to Lord Shiva and demanded Parvati, 
which made Lord Shiva extremely furious. His anger resulted into the 
manifestation of a ferocious creature, which ran towards 'Rahu' to devour 
him. Rahu had no option but to take the refuge of Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva 
protected the life of 'Rahu'. 
The hungry creature, asked Shiva as to what should he eat to satisfy his 
hunger. Lord Shiva instructed him to devour his own limbs. The creative 
followed his instructions and devoured his limbs. Lord Shiva was very pleased 
by his sense of obedience. He named that creature of his palace. He also 
blessed him saying that he too would be worshipped along with him (Shiva). 
BATTLE BETWEEN LORD SHIVA AND JALANDHAR  

349 
 



Rahu went back to Jalandhar and narrated the whole story to him. Jalandhar 
then attacked Kailash mountain with his huge army. A fierce battle was fought 
between the Shiva-ganas and the demons. 
When Jalandhar realized that Lord Shiva had begun to dominate the battle he 
created beautiful 'Apsaras' and 'Gandharvas' by his illusionary powers to 
divert the attention of Lord Shiva and his ganas. He was successful in his 
attempt. Lord Shiva and his ganas became enchanted by the heavenly beauty 
of the apsaras. They stopped fighting and started watching their dance and 
music. 
Meanwhile Jalandhar went to Parvati in the guise of Lord Shiva but was 
recognized by her. Being enchanted by the beauty of Goddess Parvati, he 
looked at her with his evil intentions, but was immobilized by her wrath. 
Mother Parvati then went to Lord Vishnu and narrated the whole story. She 
wanted to teach Jalandhar a lesson. She requested Lord Vishnu to go to 
Jalandhar's wife in the guise of Jalandhar and act in the same way. Jalandhar 
had dared to do. 
VRINDA GETA DISHONORED 
With the help of his divine powers, Lord Vishnu created many inauspicious 
dreams while Vrinda was asleep. Vrinda became very restless and when the 
anxieties become unbearable she proceeded towards the forest. 
Vrinda saw a hermit in the forest who was preaching his disciples. The hermit 
was none other than Lord Vishnu. She went to that hermit and prayed to save 
her husband's life. 
Lord Vishnu disappeared from the scene and reappeared - this time in the 
guise of Jalandhar. But Vrinda was unable to recognize the real identity of her 
husband. She was very pleased after finding her husband. Both of them stayed 
in that very forest as husband and wife for a very long time. 
One day, she came to know about the real identity of the person, who was 
impersonating as her husband. Realizing that her chastity has been breached, 
she cursed Lord Vishnu by saying that just as he had played a deceitful trick 

350 
 



with her in the same way somebody would deceitfully abduct his wife and he 
too would wander in her search. 
After cursing Lord Vishnu, Vrinda embraced death by entering into the fire. 
KILLING OF JALANDHAR On the other side, after the departure of Parvati from 
Kailash Mountain and after the illusionary powers created by Jalandhar had 
ended all the apsaras and gandharvas vanished. Shiva realized that whatever 
he was watching, was nothing more than illusion. 
Lord Shiva recommenced his battle. The demons-Shumbh and Nishumbh, 
came forward to fight with him, but ultimately they had to flee from the 
battlefield. Lord Shiva warned both of them that though they had escaped 
death at that moment, but they would be killed by Parvati. 
Now Jalandhar again arrived to fight with Lord Shiva. A fierce battle 
commenced between them. 
Finding an opportune time, Shiva severed the head of Jalandhar by his 
'Chakra' which had been created from his toe. After his death, Jalandhar's soul 
united with Shiva. 
When the deities came to know about the killing of Jalandhar, they became 
overjoyed. They came to Lord Shiva and eulogized him. Thy also hailed his 
great achievement. After expressing their gratitude they returned to their 
respective abodes. 
MANIFESTATION OF 'AMLA' (MYROBALAN), TULSI (BASIL) AND 'MALTI'  
Lord Vishnu was very much saddened by the death of Vrinda. He took the 
ashes from the pyre and after applying them on his body started wondering 
here and there. 
The deities became very worried to see the condition of Lord Vishnu. They 
went to Lord Shiva and requested him to eliminate the false attachment with 
which Sri Vishnu was suffering. Lord Shiva sent the deities to Goddess Parvati, 
saying that she would ceratainly help in this regard. 

351 
 



The deities went to Goddess Parvati and prayed to her. She became very 
pleased and with the assistance of Lakshmi and Saraswati, gave some seeds to 
then. The deities sprayed those seeds on the pyre, on which Vrinda had given 
up her life. Three holy plants manifested from that pyreAmla, Tulsi and Malti. 
Later on Tulsi and Malti attained to the Vishnuloka, by the virtue of their 
respective penance. 
BIRTH OF SHANKHACHUDA AND HIS MARRIAGE  
Suta narrated the tale of the birth of Shankhachuda and how Shiva killed him 
with his Trishula. 
He told the sages that Shankhachuda was born to the demon king 'Dambha'. 
Shankhachuda was in fact, Sudama, in his previous life. He was born in the 
family of demons due to the curse of Radha. When Shankhachuda grew up, he 
went to Pushkar (Ajmer, Rajasthan) and did a tremendous penance to please 
Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma blessed him and said that he would remain 
invincible. He also instructed Shankhachuda to go to 'Badrikashrama' where 
he would find his would be wife Tulsi, the daughter of Dharmadhwaja. 
Shankhachuda went to Badrikasharama and married Tulsi as per the 
instructions of Lord Brahma. 
He then returned back to his capital accompanied by his wife Tulsi. 
SHANKHACHUDA BECOMES THE RULER OF ALL THE THREE WORLDS  
When Shankhachuda reached his capital after marrying Tulsi, he was crowned 
as the king of the demons by Shukracharya. After his coronation, 
Shankhachuda attacked Indrapuri supported by his huge army and defeated 
the deities. In a very short time all the three worlds were under his control. 
After being defeated by Shankhachuda, the deities went to Lord Brahma and 
sought his help in eliminating the menance called Shankhachuda. Lord Brahma 
then took them to Lord Vishnu. All of them were taken to Lord Shiva by 
Vishnu. They expressed their request to liberate them from the troubles 
created by Shankhachuda. 

352 
 



Lord Shiva assured the deities that he will certainly kill Shankhachuda and 
hence they should not worry about him. The deities then happily returned to 
their respective abodes. 
Lord Shiva sent his messenger named Pushpadant, to Shankhachuda to ask 
him to return back the kingdom of the deities to them. Shankhachuda refused 
to oblige this demand, on the contrary he expressed his willingness and 
readiness to fight Lord Shiva. Pushpadant returned back and narrated the 
whole story to Lord Shiva. 
SHIVA KILLS SHANKHACHUDA 
Lord Shiva was now fully convinced about the inevitability of the battle. He 
first sent all his ganas under the leadership of Kartekiye and Ganesha. Later on 
Bhadrakali proceeded towards the battlefield with a huge army as per the 
own wish of Lord Shiva himself. At last Lord Shiva proceeded towards the 
battlefield accompanied by the deities. All the troops collected at the bank of 
river Chandrabhaga and rested under the shade of a Banyan tree. 
Shankhachuda handed over the kingdom to his son and went to his wife to 
take her permission before going to the battlefield. His wife was reluctant to 
allow him to go, but he somehow managed to convince her. He then 
proceeded towards the banks of Chandrabhaga with a huge army. 
A fierce battle started between the deities and the demons. Both of them 
attacked each other with the most destructive weapons. But when the army 
of Chandrachuda began to dominate the fight, the deities fled away and took 
the refuge of Lord Shiva. They told Shiva of the number of deities who had 
been killed while fighting. 
After the defeat of the deities and the ganas Kartikeya and Ganesha went to 
fight Shankhachuda. 
A spectacular battle was fought between Shankhachuda and both of them. 
Later on they were joined by Bhadrakali. Bhadrakali would have devoured 
Shankhachuda without any problem, but she spared his life because of the 
boon, given to him by Lord Brahma. Now it was the turn of Lord Shiva to join 

353 
 



the battle, but even he could not cause any harm to him because of Lord 
Brahma's boon. 
While a tremendous battle was being fought between Lord Shiva and 
Shankhachuda. Lord Vishnu appeared and demanded the armour from 
Shankhachuda, which he had put on, his body in the guise of a Brahmin. 
Shankhachuda gave his armour to him without any kind of suspicion. Lord 
Vishnu then went to Shankhachuda's wife in the guise of her husband i.e. 
Shankhachuda. He destroyed the chastity of Tulsi, Shankhachuda's wife. 
Shankhachuda derived his power from the chastity of his wife and it vanished 
the moment, her chastity was destroyed. 
Bhadrakali was creating havoc in the army of Shankhachuda. Shankhachuda 
became very furious and attacked Shiva. Shiva repulsed his assault and 
attacked him with his Trishul. 
Shankhachuda who had become powerless was killed instantaneously. The 
deities were very pleased at the death of Shankhachuda. After worshipping 
Lord Shiva they went back to their respective abodes. 
TULSI CURSES LORD VISHNU  
After being instructed by Goddess Parvati, Lord Vishnu had gone to Tulsi in the 
guise of her husband- Shankhachuda, so that the breach of Tulsi chastity could 
help Lord Shiva to kill Shankhachuda, who derived his power from Tulsi's 
chastity and virtuosity. 
Initially Tulsi could not recognize Lord Vishnu. She was extremely joyous at his 
arrival. But very soon she was able to realize the real identity of Lord Vishnu, 
who had disguised himself as her husband. She became very angry and cursed 
Lord Vishnu to become a stone. She was crying unconsolably. 
Lord Vishnu contemplated on Shiva as a result of which he appeared. Lord 
Shiva blessed Tulsi that she would become the beloved of Lord Vishnu. 
Due to Tulsi's curse, Lord Vishnu attained the form of Shaligram which is a 
stone and because of Lord Shiva's blessings. Tulsi leaves started being offered 
to the Shaligram, in the process of its worship. 

354 
 



KILLING OF HIRANYAKSHA  
While narrating the tale of Hiranyaksha's killing, Sutli said- " 
Once, Shiva and Parvati were living at the Mandarachal mountain. Parvati, 
playfully covered both the eyes of Shiva with her palms. This made Lord Shiva 
to perspire from his forehead. From this perspiration manifested a ferocious 
creature. Parvati asked Lord Shiva as to who this creature was. Lord Shiva told 
her that he was his son Andhak. 
Parvati brought up Andhak with great love and care. Hiranyaksha the demon 
did a tremendous penance to please Lord Shiva, with a desire to acquires a 
son. Lord Shiva became pleased with his penance and appeared before him. 
He asked Hiranyaksha to demand any boon, which he promised to fulfill. 
Hiranyaksha expressed his desire to have a very powerful and mighty son. 
Shiva decided to give Andhak to him, who at that time was being brought up 
by Parvati. Hiranyaksha brought young Andhak along with him. 
With the help of Andhak, he conquered all the three worlds. He lifted up the 
earth and proceeded towards the Netherworld. The deities became very 
terrified. They prayed to Lord Vishnu and when he appeared they requested 
him to kill Hiranyaksha. 
Lord Vishnu killed Hiranyaksha in his incarnation of boar. After killing 
Hiranyaksha, Lord Vishnu made Andhak the king of Netherworld and place the 
earth at its original place. 
KILLING OF HIRANYAKSHIPU  
Hiranyakashipu was filled with grief when he heard the news of his brothers' 
death. To avenge Hiranyaksha's death, he started to torment the deities. 
Becoming homeless, the deities started wandering here and there. 
Hiranyakashipu was still unsatisfied. He wanted to acquire more power and 
authority. He went to the Mandarachal mountain and started doing a 
tremendous penance to please Lord Brahma. 

355 
 



Lord Brahma appeared before him and asked him demand anything he wished 
to be fulfilled. 
Hiranyakashipu said-"O Lord! Bless me so that I do neither die during the day 
nor during the night; neither on the earth nor in the sky; neither by the deities 
nor by the demons; neither by a human being nor by an animal. Bless me O 
Lord! O that I do not get killed by any type of weapon." Lord Brahma blessed 
Hiranyakshipu and said 'so be it'. Now, Hiranyakashipu became more ruthless 
and arrogant. He declared himself the almighty God and ordered his subjects 
to worship him and his idol. His son-Prahlada was a very great devotee of Lord 
Vishnu. He did not pay heed to his father's command and continued to 
worship Lord Vishnu. Hiranyakashipu tried to kill Prahlada many times, but 
each time he survived by the blessings of Lord Vishnu. 
When Hiranyakashipu's atrocities crossed all its limits, the deities went to Lord 
Vishnu and requested him to kill Hiranyakashipu. Lord Vishnu appeared in his 
incarnation of Nrisimha (half lion and half man) and killed Hiranyakashipu with 
his sharp nails, during the dusk. After giving his kingdom to his son Prahalad, 
Lord Vishnu went back to his abode. 
SHIVA TEACHES 'MRITASANJIVANI VIDDYA' TO SHUKRACHARYA  
Shukracharya did a severe penance for five thousand years to please Shiva 
and acquire the secrets of Mritasanjivani Viddya (bringing back dead person 
alive) from him. 
When Lord Shiva did not appear even after such a tremendous penance, then 
he indulges himself in severest form of penance, by quitting having food and 
water. He now started living only on air. This continued for thousands of year. 
Lord Shiva became very pleased with his penance. He manifested from the 
very Shivalinga, Shukracharya had been worshipping till now. He taught the 
secrets of 'Mritasanjivani' viddya to him and told him that by the help of this 
viddya he would become capable of making alive the dead persons. Lord Shiva 
also blessed Shukracharya to become a star and attain respectability among 
all the planets. 

356 
 



After blessing Shukracharya like this, Lord Shiva disappeared into the same 
Shivalinga from which he had appeared. 
BATTLE BETWEEN LORD SHIVA AND ANDHAK  
Once, Andhak brothers jokingly told him that, since his real parents were 
somebody else (Shiva and Parvati) therefore he was not fit to rule them. 
Though they had told this in good humour, yet Andhak was very much 
saddened by their remark. He relinquished his throne and went to a deserted 
place in the forest and started to do a severe penance. Lord Brahma became 
very pleased by his penance and appeared before him. He asked him to 
demand anything he wished to be fulfilled. Andhak said- "I only long for the 
love and affection of my brothers. O Lord! Bless me so that nobody should be 
able to kill one except Lord Shiva." Lord Brahma blessed him and said- 'so be 
it'. 
Andhak returned to his kingdom and with the co-operation of his brothers like 
Prahalad etc he brought even the deities under his control. But drunk with 
power he became very arrogant and started tormenting all the creatures. He 
did not show any respect to the Vedas, Brahmin and the deities. 
Andhak had become so arrogant that once he even dared to dishonor his own 
mother-Parvati, who at that time was living at the Mandarachal mountain. 
Shiva became very furious with him. 
Andhak attacked Shiva with his huge army. Lord Shiva sent his numerous 
ganas to fight him, but all of them were killed by Andhak. 
When Lord Shiva got the news of the arrival of Andhak with his army, he sent 
Lord Vishnu and his remaining ganas to fight him. He himself went to perform 
his austerity named 'Pashupat'. The deities fought with Andhak for one 
thousand years. Meanwhile Lord Shiva returned after completing his 
'Pashupat Vrata' and joined them. 
Seeing Lord Shiva in front of him, Andhak became furious and attacked him 
ferociously. His companion, whose name was 'Vidhas', devoured all the 

357 
 



deities. The demons who had been killed in the battle, were brought back to 
life by Shukracharya. 
Lord Shiva became very angry and swallowed Shukracharya. He also extracted 
the deities from the stomach of Vidhas who had been swallowed by him 
earlier. After that, Lord Shiva attacked Andhak with his trident, which injured 
him. But from each drop of his blood which fell on the ground, manifested 
thousands of demons who resembled Andhak. 
Lord Shiva then instructed Goddess 'Chandika' to drink the blood, while he 
killed all the demons. 
Goddess Chandika followed the instructions of Shiva and drank each drop of 
blood, which oozed out from the wounds of the demons and did not let single 
drop of blood to fall on the ground. 
After killing all the demons, Lord Shiva lifted Andhak with his trident and 
hanged him between the earth and sky. Andhak remained there for a very 
long period of time, bearing the heat of the sun and the showers of rain. But 
he remained alive. Ultimately he had to take the refuge of Lord Shiva, to save 
his life. Lord Shiva became pleased by his eulogy and made him his 
'Ganadhees' (leader of all the Ganas). 
When Lord Shiva swallowed up Shukracharya, he became very restless and 
started to find out a way through which he could come out from Shiva's 
stomach. But all of his efforts went in vain. 
Finding no other option, he started to chant the name of Lord Shiva. His 
chantings continued for one hundred years. By the blessings of Shiva, he came 
out from Shiva's stomach through the ejaculated semen. 
After coming out, Shukraharya eulogized Lord Shiva. Shiva became pleased 
with him and showered him with affection just like his own son. After being 
blessed Shukracharya went and rejoined the army of the demons. KILLING OF 
GAJASUR Goddess Durga had killed the demon Mahishasur, who used to 
torment the deities. Gajasur was the son of Mahishasur. To avenge his father's 
death, Gajasur did a tremendous penance to please Lord Brahma. 

358 
 



Lord Brahma appeared before him and asked him to demand any boon. 
Gajasur said- "O Lord! Even a 'Jeetendriya' (one who has full control over his 
senses) should not be able to kill me," Lord Brahma blessed him by saying - 'So 
be it'. Gradually, Gajasur atrocities crossed all limits. 
He became the Lord of all the three worlds. He forced even the deities to 
worship him. He used to torment the Brahmins and the other religious people. 
One day Gajasur arrived at Kashi and started tormenting the people living over 
there. The deities came to Lord Shiva and requested him to rescue Kashi by 
killing Gajasur. 
Lord Shiva came to Kashi and fought a battle with Gajasur. He killed Gajasur 
with this trident. 
At the time of his death, Gajasur eulogized Lord Shiva and requested him to 
put his (Gajasur's) skin on his (Shiva's) body. 
Lord Shiva agreed to fulfill his wish. At the spot where, Gajasur was killed a 
famous Shivalinga by the name of Krittivaseshwar was constructed as per the 
own wish of Lord Shiva. 
KILLING OF NIRHADDAITYA Diti was filled with grief when she came to known 
about her son's (Hiranyaksha) death, who was killed by Lord Vishnu. 
Nirhaddaitya, who was the maternal uncle of Prahlada consoled her an 
promised to avenge the death of Hiranyaksha. He thought to destroy the vedic 
religion. According to him the deities derived their strength and power from 
this very vedic religion. He planned to eliminate the priestly class-Brahmins, so 
that the chances of 'Yagyas' being performed becomes extinct and the deities 
were starved to such an extent that they became weak and powerless. 
Thinking that then it would not be very difficult to kill the 'weak' deities. 
Nirhaddaitya arrived at Kashi to execute his plan, which during those time was 
the chief center of the Brahmins. He attained the form of a tiger and stationed 
himself in a nearby forest. He used to kill any Brahmin who used to come over 
there to collect 'Kusha' grass and fuel. With the help of his illusionary powers 
he used to attain the form of a hermit during the daytime and lived among 

359 
 



them. But during the night, he used to enter into the houses of the Brahmins 
in the form of a tiger and used to devour them. 
On one night of Shivaratri, when a Brahmin was busy worshipping Lord Shiva, 
Niraddaitya who was in the form of a tiger entered the temple. But, since the 
Brahmin was engaged in the worship of Lord Shiva, he could not harm the 
Brahmin. Lord Shiva emerged from the very Shivalinga, which the Brahmin 
was worshipping and punched the demon with his clenched fist, so hard that 
he died. 
KILLING OF VIDAL AND UTPAL Long long ago there used to live two demons by 
the names of Vidul and Utpal. Both of them did a tremendous penance to 
please Lord Brahma. After being blessed by Lord Brahma, they became very 
arrogant and started tormenting the deities and the Brahmins. 
The deities went to Lord Brahma and sought his help. Lord Brahma told them 
that both the demons would be killed by Goddess Parvati very soon. He also 
instructed the deities to eulogize Shiva and Parvati to seek their blessings. The 
deities went back and started eulogizing Shiva and Parvati. 
One fateful day, Vidal and Utpal arrived at the place where Goddess Parvati 
was having amusements with her companions. Vidal and Utpal had disguised 
themselves as the ganas of Shiva. Lord Shiva recognized the real identity of 
the demons. He signaled towards Parvati pointing towards the demons. 
Parvati who was playing with a ball with her companions, understood what 
Lord Shiva meant to say. She hit both of them with the ball, with such force 
that both the demons died on the spot. The ball then fell down on the ground 
and transformed into a Shivalinga which became as 'Kandukeshwar'. The 
deities became very pleased at the death of Vidal and Utpal. 
PART THREE SHATRUDRA SAMHITA  
The sages requested Suta to describe about the different incarnations of Lord 
Shiva. Suta told them that, although Lord Shiva took many incarnations but 
five of his incarnations were very important- Sadhojat Namadeva, Tat 
Purusha, Aghoresh and Ishan. 

360 
 



FIVE SHIVA INCARNATIONS 1) SADHOJAT:-Lord Shiva took his first incarnation 
from the physique incarnation from the physique of Lord Brahma, who was 
engrossed in his deep state of meditation, during the nineteenth Kalpa named 
Shweta Lohit. Lord Brahma gave him the name Sadhojat and eulogized him. 
Later on, from the physique of Sadhojat four of his disciple manifested, whose 
names were Sunand, Nandan, Vishwanandan and Upanandan. All the four 
disciples were of fair complexion. 
Lord Shiva blessed Brahma and empowered him to do creation. 
2) NAMDEVA:- During the twentieth Kalpa named 'Rakta' the complexion of 
Lord Brahma turned red, while he was engrossed in his meditative state. From 
his body manifested an entity who also was of red complexion. Lord Brahma 
named him Namadeva considering him to be the incarnation of Lord Shiva and 
eulogized him. Later on four sons were born to Namadeva, whose names 
were Viraj, Viwah, Vishok and Vishwabhawan. All of them were of red 
complexion just like their father Namadeva. Namdeva Shiva along with his 
virtuous progenies blessed Lord Brahma with the power of creation. 
3) TAT PURUSHA:- The twenty-first Kalpa on the earth was known as 
'Peetavasa'. It was named so because of the apparel of Lord Brahma which 
were of yellow colours. Lord Brahma's prayer resulted into the manifestation 
of an effulgent entity. Considering this entity as Lord Shiva, Lord Brahma 
started chanting the mantras of Shiva Gayatri. After the chantings of the 
mantras, numerous entities manifested who had put on apparels of yellow 
colour on their body. 
This way the third incarnation of Shiva popularly known as Tat Purusha 
manifested. 
4) GHORESH:- After the Peetavasa Kalpa came the Shiva Kalpa. A black 
complexioned manifested while Lord Brahma was engrossed in his deep 
meditative state. Lord Brahma considering this entity as Aghor Shiva started 
eulogizing him. Lord Brahma's eulogization resulted into the manifestation of 
four more entities who had the same black complexion as that of 'Aghor 

361 
 



Shiva'. Their names were Krishna, Krishnashikha, Krishnamukha and 
Krishnakanthdhari. Ghor Shiva along with those four entities blessed Lord 
Brahma with the power of creation. 
5) ISHAN- During the Kalpa named Vishwaroop, manifestations of Saraswati 
and Ishan Shiva took place. Lord Brahma eulogized Ishan Shiva after which 
four divine entities named Jati, Mundi, Shikhandi and Ardhamundi manifested 
from Ishan Shiva. All of them blessed Lord Brahma with the power of creation. 
EIGHT IDOLS OF SHIVA After describing about the five chief incarnations of 
Lord Shiva, Suta explained about the eight famous idols of Lord Shiva- Sharva, 
Bhava, Rudra, Ugra, Bhima, Pashupati, Ishan and Mahadeva. These eight idols 
of Shiva symbolizes the eight natural elements which help in the process of 
creation, nurturement and annihilation. These eight natural elements are 
Land, water, fire, air, sky, supreme soul (Kshetragya), Sun and the moon. Being 
established in these eight idols, Shiva controls the whole world. 
SHIVA AS ARDHANARISHWAR  
Once upon a time Lord Brahma, not seeing an expansion in his creation 
became very worried. A heavenly voice instructed him to commence creation 
with the help of copulative activities. But since all the incarnation of Shiva had 
been males till then, therefore Lord Brahma was finding it impossible. 
Lord Brahma contemplated on the form of Shiva and Shakti. Lord Shiva 
became very pleased with him and appeared in his form of 'Ardhanarishwar 
(half male half female). Left side of his body resembled like a woman while the 
right side appeared like a man. Lord Brahma worshipped this form of Shiva. 
Lord Shiva then separated the feminine part of his body and thus manifested 
mother Shakti. Lord Brahma worshipped her and requested to bestow such 
power by which he could create a woman. 
Goddess Shakti blessed him by saying - 'So be it' and vanished. This way Lord 
Brahma became capable of commencing copulative creation. 
VARIOUS INCARNATION OF VYASA AND LORD SHIVA  

362 
 



During the 'Varaha' Kalpa of the Seventh 'Manvantar' Lord Vishnu illuminated 
all the three world by his divine presence. This seventh Manvantara consisted 
of four yugas which repeated themselves in a cyclic way for twelve times. 
The first dwapar of this seventh manvantar saw the manifestation of Lord 
Shiva for the welfare of the Brahmins. When Kali Yuga arrived Lord Shiva again 
manifested himself along with Goddess Shakti and was known as Mahamuni 
Shweta. Lord Brahma had the priviledge of becoming his disciple. 
During the second dwapar, sage Vyasa existed as Satya, Prajapati and Lord 
Shiva became famous as 'Sutar'. Lord Shiva in his incarnation of Sutra had 
many disciples among whom 'Dundubhi' was very famous. 
During the third dwapar sage Vyasa took his incarnation as Bhargava and Lord 
Shiva became famous as Daman. Lord Shiva in his incarnation as Daman had 
four disciples among whom Vishoka was very famous. When Kali Yuga arrived 
after this third dwapar. Lord Shiva along with his Disciples helped Sage Vyasa. 
During the fourth Dwapar Sage Vyasa took his incarnation as Angira and Lord 
Shiva as 'Suhotra'. Even in this incarnation Lord Shiva had four disciples among 
whom Sumukh was very famous. Lord Shiva along with his disciples helped 
Angira. 
During the fifth dwapar sage Vyasa took incarnation as Savita and Lord Shiva 
as 'Kanka' who was very famous for his tremendous austerities. Kanka had 
four disciples among whom Sanak was very famous. 
During the sixth dwapar sage Vyasa took incarnation as Mrityu and Lord Shiva 
as 'Lokakshi'. 
Lokakshi had four disciples among whom Sudhama was very prominent. 
During the seventh dwapar sage Vyasa manifested himself as Indra and Lord 
Shiva as Jaigisatya. 
Jaigisatya had four disciples among whom Saraswat was very prominent. 
During the eighth dwapar sage Vyasa took incarnation as Vashishtha and Lord 
Shiva as Dadhivahan. Dadhivahan had four disciples among whom Kapila was 

363 
 



very famous. During the nineth dwapar sage Vyasa took incarnation as 
Saraswat and Lord Shiva as 'Rishabh'. 
Lord Shiva in his incarnation as Rishabhdeva had four disciples among whom 
Parashar was very famous. 
NANDIKESHWAR While describing about the incarnation of Nandikeshwar 
Suta saysSage Shilad did a tremendous penance to please Lord Shiva with an 
aspiration to have a son. Lord Shiva appeared before him and asked him to 
demand any boon he wished. 
Sage Shilad expressed his desire of having a son who is not born from a 
physical body and who is proficient in all the sriptural knowledges. Lord Shiva 
blessed him by saying - 'So be it'. 
Sage Shilad then returned to his hermitage and performed a 'Yagya'. From the 
yagya-kunda appeared a child who possessed four arms and three eyes. Sage 
Shilad was very pleased to see that child. The birth of the child was celebrated 
with great fanfare. Lord Shiva and Parvati arrived to bless the child. 
The child was named Nandi as his birth had given immense joy (ananda) to 
sage Shilad. Later on Nandi lived with his father like any other normal child 
and was brought up with great love and care. He became proficient in all the 
scriptures within seven years. 
Being inspired by Lord Shiva, two Brahmins came to sage Shilad and informed 
him that after one year Nandi would be no more. Sage Shilad became 
extremely sad. 
Seeing his father in his sorrowful mood, Nandi consoled him and later on went 
to do penance. 
His tremendous penance pleased Lord Shiva and Parvati and both of them 
appeared before him. 
Lord Shiva blessed him and said- "You are just like me, so you will never die". 
Lord Shiva also gave one of his garlands to him. As soon as Nandi wore that 
garland he imbibed all the qualities of Lord Shiva. After that Lord Shiva took 

364 
 



out some water from his locks of hair and sprinkled on him, as a result of 
which five rivers came into existence. These five rivers were later on came to 
be known as Panchanad. Lord Shiva then made him the leader of all his ganas. 
Later on Goddess Parvati took Nandi under her guidance and considered him 
just like her own son. Nandi was married to Suyasha- the daughter of Marut. 
Ultimately all of them accompanied Lord Shiva to his abode. 
BHAIRAV GETS LIBERATED FROM HIS SIN  
Bhairav who was created by Lord Shiva from his third eye, had severed one of 
the five heads of Lord Brahma on the instruction of Lord Shiva. Now Brahma 
was left with only four heads. Carrying the skull of Brahma in his hand, 
Bhairava started wandering in all the three worlds. To atone his sin of severing 
the head of Lord Brahma, he was begging alms. 
Bhairav reached Vishnuloka where he was welcomed warm-heartedly by Lord 
Vishnu and Lakshmi. Goddess Lakshmi dropped the learning (Vidya) named 
Manorath (by which all the wishes could be fulfilled) in the begging bowl 
(Skull) of Bhariav. Bhairav became extremely happy by this gift. Lord Shiva had 
created a oegrass named 'Brahmahatya' and had instructed Bhairav to reach 
Kashi, before her. According to Lord Shiva this way the sin committed by 
Bhairav could successfully atoned. 
After being blessed by Goddess Lakshmi, Bhairav took the permission of Lord 
Vishnu and proceeded towards Kashi. After his departure asked Brahmahatya 
to stop chasing Bhairav. But she refused saying that she was just following the 
instruction of Lord Shiva. 
When Bhairav reached Kashi, Brahmahatya too came near the outskirts of the 
city, but could not enter it because of Lord Shiva's power instead she entered 
in to the netherworld (Patal loka). As soon as Bhairav had entered Kashi. The 
begging-bowl (skull) fell on the ground and thus Bhairav got liberated from his 
sins. Bhairav was extremely relieved. The place where the skull of Brahma had 
fallen, later on became as Kapal mochan- the most sacred place of pilgrimage. 
SHIVA TAKES INCARNATION AS SHARABH  

365 
 



While describing about the incarnation of Sharabh Suta told sages- "When 
Vishnu took his incarnation of Nrisimha to kill the demon king Hiranyakashipu, 
his anger could not be subdued even after the killing of Hiranyakashipu. His 
anger had frightened all the three worlds. Lord Brahma sent Prahlada to 
Nrisimha so that his anger gets cool down. Prahlada prayed to Nrisimha. 
Nrisimha took him in his embrace but still his anger was not subdued.”  
“All the deities went to Lord Shiva and requested to him to cool down Vishnu's 
anger. Lord Shiva then sent Bhairav and Veerbhadra to Nrisimha. When 
Veerbhadra politely requested Nrisimha to cool down, he (Nrisimha) tried to 
pounce on him (Veerbhadra). Right then Lord Shiva appeared in his most 
devastating form. He was looking frightening in his giant form and with 
thousands of hand. His appearance was resembling a huge cannibal bird. Lord 
Shiva injured Nrisimha with his giant wings and after carrying Lord Vishnu in 
his giant wings and after carrying Lord Vishnu in his arms he flew in the sky. 
Lord Vishnu was so frightened that he became unconscious.”  
“After regarding his consciousness Lord Nrisimha appeared in his form of Lord 
Vishnu and eulogized Shiva, which made Lord Shiva very pleased. Lord Shiva 
wore the head of Nrisimha with the garland of skull in his neck. The remaining 
body was carried by Veerbhadra and abandoned at a mountain."  
VISHWANAR RECEIVES BOON FROM SHIVA 
Once upon a time, there used to live a Brahmin named Vishwanar who was a 
great devotee of Lord Shiva. Shuchismati was his wife who was a devout wife. 
Being pleased by her sense of dutifulness, Vishwanar tried to reward his wife. 
Shuchismati expressed her desire of having a son just like Lord Shiva. 
Vishwanar went to Kashi to please Lord Shiva by his penance. He worshipped 
Vishveshwar linga with supreme devotion. 
Lord Shiva became very pleased by his devotion and he appeared before 
Vishwanar from the Shivalinga. When Vishwanar expressed his desire, Lord 
Shiva agreed to take birth as his Son. 
Vishwanar came back to his house happily. 

366 
 



SHIVA'S INCARNATION AS GRIHAPATI  
In due course of time, Shuchismati became pregnant and gave birth to a 
beautiful child. The whole family celebrated the birth of the child. The whole 
family celebrated the birth of the child. 
The name giving ceremony of that child was attended by all the deities and 
sages including Lord Shiva and Parvati. Lord Brahma named the child as 
Grihapati. When Grihapati attained the age of five, his sacred thread 
ceremony was performed. Within a year he became proficient in all the Vedas 
and other sacred texts. 
When Grihapati attained the age of nine, Narada came and informed 
Vishwanar that death of Grihapati was imminent because of the evil effects of 
the planetary combinations. Vishwanar and Shuchismati were saddened and 
started crying. 
Grihapati then consoled his parents and proceeded towards Kashi to do 
penance so that the 'death' could be conqured. Grihapati commenced his 
penance at Kashi. The deity Indra arrived there and requested him to demand 
anything he wished but Grihapati refused. Indra became furious and tried to 
attack him with his weapon-Vajra. Grihapati was very terrified. 
Right then Lord Shiva appeared and Indra had to retreat from the scene. Lord 
Shiva blessed Grihapati by saying - "What to say about this lightning - Vajra, 
even Kalvajra would not be able to kill you." Grihapati became very pleased. 
The Shivalinga which he worshipped, later on became famous as 'Agnishwar 
linga. Lord Shiva made Grihapati the Lord of all the directions. 
LORD SHIVA'S INCARNTION AS YAKSHESHWAR  
During the time when ocean was being churned first of all poison appeared 
from it. The deities were very terrified to see the tremendous heat it 
generated. They went to Lord Shiva and requested to protect them from the 
heat of that poison. Lord Shiva drank all the poison but did not let it pass 
down his throat. 

367 
 



After the poison, Nectar appeared from the ocean, which was drunk by the 
deities. The demons too wanted to drink the nectar, so a tremendous battle 
ensued between them and the deities. The deities became victorious in this 
battle because they had become immortal due to the effect of the Nectar. 
This victory made the deities very arrogant. 
Lord Shiva was very concerned about their arrogant nature. He went to them 
in the guise of a Yaksha. He asked as to what was it that had made them so 
arrogant. The deities replied that their arrogance stemmed from victory over 
the demons. Lord Shiva who was disguised as Yaksha replied- "Your pride is 
based on false notion, because you did not achieve victory due to somebody's 
grace and blessing." The deities disagreed with him. Lord Shiva then asked 
them to cut the grass if they considered themselves so mighty. He then kept a 
grass leaf in front of them. Each of the deities tried to cut that grass with their 
respective weapons but remained unsuccessful in their attempts. They were 
all amazed. Suddenly a heavenly voice was heard which said that the Yaksha 
was none other than Lord Shiva himself. The deities realized their mistakes. 
They apologized to Lord Shiva. 
After vanquishing the false pride of the deities Lord Shiva disappeared. 
TEN INCARNATIONS OF SHIVA AND SHAKTI  
Describing about the ten incarnations and their corresponding power (Shakti), 
Suta saidThe first incarnation of Lord Shiva was as Mahakal and his Shakti was 
called Mahakali. Lord Shiva took his second incarnation as Tar and his Shakti 
was called 'Tara'. The third incarnation of Lord Shiva was as Bhuvaneshwar 
and his Shakti was called 'Bhuvaneshwari'. Lord Shiva took his fourth 
incarnation as 'Shodash' who was also known as 'Srividdyesh' and his Shakti 
was called 'Shodashi' or 'Sri'. 
Lord Shiva took his fifth incarnation as Bhairav and his Shakti was called 
'Bhairavi'. The sixth incarnation of Lord Shiva is famous as 'Chhinamastak' and 
his Shakti by the name of 'Chhinamasta. Lord Shiva took his seventh 
incarnation as 'Dhoomvan' and his Shakti was known as 'Dhoomvati. The 

368 
 



eighth incarnation was as Baglamukh and his Shakti as Baglamukhi. The nineth 
incarnation of Lord Shiva became famous as Matang and his Shakti as 
'Matangi'. Lord Shiva took his tenth incarnation as 'Kamal' and his Shakti as 
Kamala. If these ten incarnations of Shiva are worshipped along with his ten 
Mahavidyas then a man attains salvation. 
THE ORIGIN OF ELEVEN RUDRAS  
Once, the deities went to sage Kashyapa after being tormented by the 
demons. They complained to him about the misdeeds of the demons, who 
also happened to be their step brothers. Sage Kashyapa became extremely 
furious, when he heard about the misdeeds of his sons - the demons. To 
protect the deities from his sons, he commenced a penance to please Lord 
Shiva. 
Lord Shiva became very pleased by his penance and appeared before him. He 
asked Kashyapa to demand anything he wished. Kashyapa then requested 
Lord Shiva to take birth as his son and destroy the demons. Lord Shiva blessed 
him and said - 'So be it'. Lord Shiva, later on took birth as eleven Rudras from 
the womb of his wife Surabhi. The name of these eleven rudras were as 
follows:- 1) Kapali, 2) Pingal, 3) Bheem, 4) Virupaksha, 5) Vilohit, 6) Shastra, 7) 
Ajapad, 8)Ahirbudhnya, 9) Shambhu, 10) Chand and 11) Bhav. 
These eleven Rudras fought battles with the demons and killed them. The 
deities were relieved after the death of the demons. They worshipped these 
eleven rudras to express their gratitude and indebtedness. 
SHIVA'S INCARNATION AS DURVASA  
Describing about the Lord Shiva's incarnation as Durvasa, Suta told the 
deities:- "once Atri - the manasputra of Lord Brahma went to do penance at 
the bank of the river Nivindhya which flew by the foothills of Trayakshakul 
mountain as per the instructions of Lord Brahma himself. He commenced 
doing a tremendous penance. The effects of his penance was such that 
devastating flames of fire manifested from his head. The fire spread in all the 
three world in no time. The deities were terrified by the death and destruction 

369 
 



caused by the fire in all the three worlds. They went to Lord Brahma to seek 
his help. Lord Brahma took them to Lord Vishnu and revealed to him about 
the destruction caused by the fire. All of them went to Lord Shiva and told him 
everything. 
Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva went to Atri and blessed him. Atri 
recognized them. 
He eulogized them. Later on Atri's wife Anusuya gave birth to three sons, who 
in fact were the incarnations of Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva. Lord 
Brahma incarnation as the Moon, Lord Vishnu as Dutt and Shiva took 
incarnation as Durvasa. 
Durvasa had tested the religiousness and virtuosity of numerous people. He 
had also tested the religiousness of king Ambareesh, who ruled over 
'Saptadweepa'.  
Once king Ambareesh had observed a fast on 'Ekadashi'. Next day, when he 
was about to break his fast sage Durvasa arrived accompanied by his large 
number of disciples. 
Durvasa was very furious with king Ambareesh. He said- "You had invited me 
for this particular, but you have also insulted me by breaking the fast by 
drinking water in my absence." Sage Durvasa would have burnt king 
Ambareesh to ashes by his curse, had not Sudarshan-the weapon of Vishnu 
came to his rescue. Sudarshan then tried to burn sage Durvasa when suddenly 
a heavenly voice was heard from the sky which said- "Durvasa is no one but 
the incarnation of Lord Shiva himself." Hearing this Sudarshan's anger was 
pacified. King Ambareesh then begged his forgiveness from sage Durvasa. 
INCARNATION OF HANUMANLord Shiva was so infatuated by the appearance 
of Lord Vishnu in his form of Mohini roopa that his semen was released on the 
ground. This semen was established by the SaptaRishis in the womb of Anjani, 
with the permission of Lord Shiva himself. 
In this way was born the mighty Hanuman.  

370 
 



Once, during his childhood Hanuman had swallowed the Sun, which he 
released only after the deities prayed to him. The sun accepted him as his 
disciple and made him proficient in all the learning's. He started living with 
Sugriva as per the instructions of his teacher - the Sun. 
During the time of Sri Rama's exile, Sugriva developed friendship with him 
with the help of Hanuman. Hanuman helped Sri Rama in finding the 
whereabouts of Sita, who had been abducted by the demon king Ravana. He 
took a giant leap and jumped across the ocean. He went to Ashok-Vatika 
where Ravana had kept Sita. He gave Sri Rama's ring to her and consoled her 
by saying that very soon Sri Rama was going to arrive and release her from 
Ravana's captivity. He also burnt the whole Lanka by his burning tail and 
returned to Sri Rama to give him Sita's news while the battle was fought 
between Sri Rama and Ravana Lakshmana got seriously injured and became 
unconscious. Hanuman saves his life by bringing the whole of mountain, upon 
which the herb Sanjivani grew. 
Being present at the service of Sri Rama, Hanuman performed his duties 
marvelously. Worship of Hanuman helps a man to become free from all kinds 
of problems, diseases and hurdles etc. 
SHIVA'S INCARNATION AS MAHESH  
Once, Bhairav who was entrusted with the job of a doorkeeper became so 
infatuated with Parvati's beauty that he tried to prevent her from going 
outside. 
Parvati became furious and cursed him to be born as a mortal man on the 
earth. Bhairav became very sad but now the damage had been already done. 
Bhairav later on appeared in the form of a man named 'Vetal'. 
Vetal prayed to Lord Shiva who took his incarnation as Mahesh and Goddess 
Parvati as Girija. 
LORD VISHNU CREATES TURBULENCES  
After the churning of the ocean had been accomplished, numerous things had 
emerged out from the ocean. Jewels, Moon, Lakshmi, Poison, Uchchaishrava 

371 
 



horse, Airavat elephant, Vessel containing Nectar were some of the things 
which emerged out from the ocean after the churning. 
A tremendous battle was fought between the deities and the demons to have 
control over the vessel containing Nectar. The demons had snatched that 
vessel from the deities. 
By the divine inspiration of Lord Shiva, Vishnu appeared in the form of Mohini 
the enchanting beauty. He successfully recovered that vessel from the control 
of the demons. To distract the attention of the demons from the nectar, Lord 
Vishnu created numerous enchanting beauties. When the demons saw them, 
they forcibly carried these enchanting beauties to their abode, the Nether 
world. After that they again returned to take control of the Nectar. 
By that time, Vishnu had made the deities drink all the nectar. When the 
demons came to know about this, they became very furious and attacked the 
deities. A tremendous battle ensured between both the sides. Ultimately the 
demons got defeated. To save their lives the demon ran towards their abode. 
Lord Vishnu chased the demons and entered the Netherland. He killed all the 
demons. 
Lord Vishnu then saw those enchanting beauties who had been abducted by 
the demons. 
Ironically, Lord Vishnu got infatuated by their beauty- who were his own 
creation. Lord Vishnu remained there for a long time. 
SHIVA'S INCARNATION AS VRISHABH  
During his stay in the Netherland, many sons were born to Lord Vishnu, who 
were very wicked and cruel. These sons of Lord Vishnu started tormenting the 
inhabitants of all the three world. All the deities and the sages went to Lord 
Shiva to take his help. They requested him to kill the cruel sons of Vishnu and 
reestablish him (lord Vishnu) in his own abode, which he had abandoned for 
the Nether world. 
Lord Shiva went to the Netherworld in the form of an Ox (Vrishabh). He killed 
all the sons of Lord Vishnu with his sharp horns. Seeing the death of his sons, 

372 
 



Lord Vishnu came forward to fight him. He attacked Lord Shiva with his 
various weapons, but Lord Shiva remained harmless. 
Ultimately Lord Vishnu was able to recognise him. He eulogized Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva then requested him to return back to Vishnuloka, he accepted. 
Lord Vishnu left his 'Sudarshan chakra' in the Netherworld and went to his 
own abode, where Lord Shiva presented him a new Sudarshan chakra. 
KILLING OF VRITTRASUR  
Once, when the deities were defeated by Vrittrasur, they went to Lord 
Brahma after hiding their weapons in the hermitage of sage Dadhichi. They 
requested Lord Brahma to reveal about the means, how vrittrasur could be 
killed. 
Lord Brahma advised the deities to male a weapon named Vajra from the 
bones of sages Dadhichi, as Dadhichi's bones were even harder than the Vajra 
of Indra by the blessings of Lord Shiva. 
All the deities then went to the hermitage of Dadhichi in the leadership of 
Brihaspati. On being enquired about the purpose of their visit, Indra said that 
he wanted his bones so that a weapon could be made out of it. Dadhichi gave 
up his life by his yogic power. Indra then instructed Kamdhenu to extract the 
bones from the dead body of Dadhichi. The bones were on given to 'Twashta' 
to construct the weapon-Vajra. Twashta took the weapons to Vishwakarma 
who at last constructed the Vajra. 
Indra killed Vrittrasur with this weapon. When Suvarcha - the wife of Dadhichi 
came to know about the cunning deeds of the deities, she cursed them to 
become animals. 
SHIVA'S INCARNATION AS YATINATH  
There used to live a bheel named Ahuk of the Arbudachal mountain. His wife 
was Ahuka. Both of them were supreme devotee of Lord Shiva. 
Once, Lord Shiva wanting to test their devotion, appeared before them 
disguised a hermit. Ahuk honored his guest and treated him very well. Lord 

373 
 



Shiva then requested him to give shelter for the whole night. Ahuk expressed 
his inability as he had a very small hut, in which only two people could be 
accommodate at a time. 
But his wife intervened and requested Ahuk to sleep outside the hut with his 
arms, as it would be inappropriate on their part to miss this chance of proving 
their hospitality. 
The hermit, who in reality was Lord Shiva slept with Ahuk's wife inside the hut, 
while Ahuk himself slept outside the hut. Unfortunately Ahuk was killed by a 
wild animal while he was asleep. 
In the morning when Lord Shiva found that Ahuk had died, his heart was filled 
with grief. But Ahuka consoled him by saying that she was proud of her 
husband as he had given up his life for a noble cause. Naturally she was very 
much saddened by her husband's death so she decided to give up her life by 
jumping into the burning pyre. 
Right then Lord Shiva appeared in his real form and blessed her by saying- "In 
his next birth your husband would take birth in a royal family. He would 
become famous as Nala and you would be born as Damayanti to king Bhima of 
Vidarbha. I would myself appear in the form of a swan and help both of you to 
unite. After enjoying all the pleasures of this world both of you would attain to 
may abode. 
After saying thus, Lord Shiva established himself as immovable Shivalinga, 
which later on became famous as Achaleshwar linga. 
SHIVA'S INCARNATION AS 'KRISHNA DARSHAN'  
King Nabhag was born in the nineth geneology of Shradhadeva who himself 
was a descendant of Ikshavaku. Nabhag was the grandfather of Ambareesh. 
During his childhood Nabhag left his home for 'gurukula to get education. In 
his absence his brothers got the wealth of the kingdom distributed among 
themselves. When Nabhag returned home after the completion of his 
education, he demanded his share of wealth from his brothers. His brothers 
told him that they had forgotten to fix his share as he was absent at the time 

374 
 



when wealth was being distributed. They advised him to go and meet their 
father. 
Nabhag went to his father and made the same request. His father advised him 
to go to sage Angiras who was trying to accomplish a yagya, but was not being 
able to accomplish it because of his attachment. 
"Go and try to eliminate his attachment by your discourses. This way sage 
Angiras on being pleased with you would give all the wealth which remains 
after the completion of the yagya." said his father. 
Nabhag did the same. He went to the place where sage Angiras was 
performing his yagya. He preached sage Angiras on the virtues of 
Religiousness. As a result he became free from all sorts of attachments and 
the yagya was successfully accomplished. 
Sage Angiras was very pleased by Nabhag's knowledge of religion. He gave all 
the remaining wealth of the yagya to Nabhag. Just then Lord Shiva arrived 
there in his incarnation of Krishna darshan and tried to prevent sage Angiras 
from donating the wealth to Nabhag, instead he staked his own claim. 
Nabhag told Lord Shiva that, since the wealth was given to him by sage 
Angiras himself, it naturally belonged to him. Lord Shiva then sent Nabhag to 
his father Shradhadev to know about his opinion. Nabhag went to Shradha 
deva who revealed to him that the person who was staking his claims on the 
wealth was none other then Lord Shiva. He also told him that whatever 
remained after the accomplishment of the yagya belongs to Lord Shiva only. 
Nabhag was now satisfied. He went back to Lord Shiva and narrated 
everything what his father had said. He then eulogized and worshipped Lord 
Shiva. Lord Shiva blessed him which helped Nabhag to attain salvation. 
LORD SHIVA APPEARS AS A BEGGAR  
There was a king named Satyarath who ruled over Vidarbha.  

375 
 



Once he was attacked by a neighbouring king. Satyarath was killed in that 
battle. His wife somehow managed to save her life by hiding in a forest. The 
queen was pregnant at that time. 
At the shore of a pond she gave birth to a child. She was feeling thirsty, so she 
went into the pond to quench her thirst. Unfortunately she was killed by a 
crocodile who used to live in that pond. 
The hungry child started crying. A beggar woman arrived there with her one 
year old child. 
Though her heart was filled with compassion seeing the hungry child cry but 
still she was hesitating to take him in her lap. Right then Lord Shiva appeared 
as a beggar and advised her to bring up the orphan child. The beggar woman 
asked about the origin of the child. Lord Shiva told her that the father of this 
child Satyarath in his previous life had left the pradoshavrata incomplete. He 
had also ordered his men to severe the head of his enemy. After this, he had 
broken his fast in his impure state, without taking a bath. 
As a result, Satyarath met a premature-death in his next life. The mother of 
this orphan child too committed a sin by deceitfully getting the co-wife of her 
husband killed. As a result she was devoured by a crocodile in her next life. 
Describing about the child Lord Shiva said- "This child was Brahmin by birth in 
his previous life, but still he never engaged himself in any religious or virtuous 
deeds. So in his next life, though he was born in a royal family, still he 
remained poor. You must take this child under your control and after his 
sacred-thread ceremony gets accomplished, you must engage him in my 
(Shiva's) devotion. If you don't obey my command then it would not be good 
for the welfare of your own child." After saying like this Lord Shiva 
disappeared. The beggar woman took that child to her house and brought him 
up with great love and care. When he grew up his sacred-thread ceremony 
was performed and then he was initiated into the worship of Lord Shiva. 
By the blessing of Lord Shiva, Satyarath's son formed a pot full of gold while 
he was taking both in a pond. Now the beggar family became very rich.  

376 
 



Once again when he had gone to a forest he met a 'gandharva' princess to 
whom he ultimately got married. This way he became a king. He lived happily 
with his mother and his brother. 
LORD SHIVA APPEARS IN THE GUISE OF INDRA (SURESHWAR)  
Upamanyu, the son of sage Vyaghrapad, was brought up in his maternal 
uncle's home since his childhood. One day Upanyu was very hungry. His 
mother gave him milk to drink which was not enough to satisfy his hunger. He 
demanded more and started crying. His mother mined some wheat flour in 
the water and gave him to drink as there was no milk left in the house. 
Upamanyu finding the taste different told his mother that it was not milk but 
something else. He again started crying. 
His mother told him that if he wanted milk then he should worship Lord Shiva 
as he only was capable of making the milk available. Upamanyu proceeded 
towards the Himalaya and started doing penance to please Lord Shiva- 
continuously chanting the mantra Om Namah Shivay. His penance generated 
so much of heat that all the three worlds started burning. 
To test his devotion, Lord Shiva and Goddess Parvati appeared before him 
disguised as Indra and Indrani respectively. Both of them told Upamanyu to 
stop doing penance. They said- "We Indra and Indrani are extremely pleased 
by your devotion. Stop worshipping Shiva. We will fulfill all your desires." Lord 
Shiva and Goddess Parvati did not stop at this. They even cursed Shiva. 
Upamanyu became very furious and got up to attack the abuser Indra. 
Shiva and Parvati were satisfied by his total dedication and devotion. They 
revealed their real identity and blessed him. Shiva promised Upamanyu that 
he would be present in the vicinity of his hermitage along with Parvati forever. 
Upamanyu returned back to his home and narrated the whole story to his 
mother who was very pleased. Lord Shiva got the name 'Sureshwar' because 
he appeared in the guise of Indra. 
SAGE VYASA ADVISES THE PANDAVAS TO WORSHIP SHIVA  

377 
 



After loosing their whole kingdom to Duryodhan in the gamble, Pandavas 
went to the dwait forest accompanied by Draupadi. They started living in a 
place which was donated by Velotra Sun. 
Duryodhan instigated sage Durvasa to torment the Pandavas. Sage Durvasa 
went to the place where Pandavas were staying, accompanied by thousands 
of his disciples. He demanded food from the Pandavas. How could have the 
Pandavas satiated from the hunger of thousands of people. Lord Krishna came 
to their rescue and saved them from being disagraced. As a result Durvasa and 
his disciples went back satisfied. 
Lord Krishna advised the Pandavas to worship Lord Shiva, but they neglected 
that advice. As a result their sufferings increased in magnitude. One day sage 
Vyasa arrived there. The Pandavas gave a rousing reception. Considering 
Arjuna to be the most capable among the Pandavas, Vyasa taught him the 
method of doing 'Parthiva' worship. Later on Arjuna went to the Indrakeel 
mountain to please Indra by his penance. Sage Vyasa preached Yudhisthira to 
remain firm on his virtuously and religiousness. 
Arjuna's penance generated so much of heat that all the living creature of the 
three worlds were unable to bear its scorching heat. All the living creatures of 
the three worlds went to Indra to seek his help. 
Indra went to Arjuna in the guise of a celibate and asked about the purpose 
for which he was doing penance. Arjuna told him that he wanted to defeat the 
Kauravas. Indra then told Arjuna that it was not in his capacity to help him 
achieve victory over the Kauravas, because of Aswatthama who was a partial 
incarnation of Lord Shiva. 
Indra advised Arjuna to please Lord Shiva by his penance so that his wishes 
could be fulfilled. 
Indra then entrusted some of his men, the job of Arjuna's security and went 
back to his abode. 
Arjuna commenced his penance to please Lord Shiva.  
LORD SHIVA APPEARS IN GUISE OF 'KIRAT' AND BLESSES ARJUNA  

378 
 



Arjuna did a tremendous penance by standing only on one leg and 
concentrating his gaze upon the blazing sun. The deities became very 
impressed by Arjuna's penance. They went to Lord Shiva and requested him to 
bless Arjuna. Lord Shiva accepted their request. 
Duryodhan had sent a demon named Mooka to kill Arjuna. Mooka had 
disguised himself as a boar. Arjuna was engrossed in his meditation, when 
suddenly his concentration got disturbed by a loud noise. He opened his eyes 
and saw Mooka being chased by a band of Kirats. In fact it was none other 
than Shiva who had appeared in the guise of Kirat. 
Both Arjuna and Lord Shiva struck the boar with their respective arrows at the 
same time. As a result the boar was killed. 
Lord Shiva sent his ganas to bring back the arrow. Similarly Arjuna too went 
near the dead boar to bring his arrow. Arjuna found his arrow lying on the 
ground. He picked it up in his hand. 
Right then the ganas arrived there and asked Arjuna to return that arrow as it 
belonged to their master (Shiva). But Arjuna refused to part with his arrow. 
Instead he asked the ganas, to convey his challenge to their master to have a 
dual with him. 
The ganas went back to Lord Shiva and narrated the whole story to him. Lord 
Shiva accepted Arjuna's challenge and went to fight him. His ganas 
accompanied him. Arjuna defeated all the ganas of Shiva. In the end Lord 
Shiva came forward to have a dual fight with him. Shiva was very much 
impressed by his valour. He revealed his real identity. Arjuna was very 
ashamed that he fought with Shiva. Lord Shiva consoled him and gave his 
weapon Pashupat to Arjuna. 
THE TWELVE JYOTIRLINGAS  
Describing about the twelve Jyotirlingas, Suta told the sages:- "There are 
twelve Jyotirlingas which are as Follows : 1) Somnath in Saurashtra, 2) 
MallikArjuna in Sri Shail, 3) Mahakal in Ujjain, 4) Amareshwar in Omkar, 5) 
Kedar in the Himalaya, 6)Bhimashankar at the bank of Bhima river. 7) 

379 
 



Vishwanath in Varanasi. 8)Trayambakeshwar ar the bank of Gautami river, 9) 
Baidyanath at Chitabhumi, 10)Nagesh which is between Darukvan dwarika 
and Bhet dwarika 11)Rameshwar at Betubandh and 12) Dhushmesh in 
Shivalaya. 
These above mentioned twelve Jyotirlingas are considered to the very sacred. 
A devotee who pays a visit to any of these places and worship, gets all of his 
wished fulfilled. 
Out of these twelve Jyotirlingas, Somnath Jyotirlinga is belived to destroy the 
sorrows of Moon. 
A devotee who worships this Jyotirlinga gets cured from incurable diseases 
like leprosy etc. 
enjoys all kinds of worldly pleasures and attains salvation. 
Similarly having a darshan of MallikArjuna helps a devotee to fulfill all of his 
desires. Having a darshan of Mahakal at Ujjain helps a devotee to fulfill all 
kinds of desire and achieve salvation. 
Similarly if a devotee merely touches the idol of Omkar linga then he achieves 
the desired fruits. 
Kedarlinga is situated in the Himalayas and is considered to be very sacred. 
Lord Shiva took his sixth incarnation as Bhima Shankar to kill the demon 
Bhima. This incarnation of Shiva tool place at a place called Kamarupa in 
Assam. 
The seventh incarnation of Lord Shiva was as Vishwanath at Kashi. This 
Jyotirlinga is considered to be very sacred and fulfiller of all the desires of a 
man. 
Lord Shiva took his eighth incarnation at the bank of river Gautami at the 
request of sage Gautam. This Jyotirlinga too is considered to be very sacred 
and a fulfiller of all the desires of a man. 
The ninth incarnation of Shiva was as Baidyanath at Deoghar in Bihar. This 
Jyotirlinga was established by the demon King Ravana. A devotee who 

380 
 



worships this Jyotirlinga gets all of his wishes fulfilled. Because of this, it ia 
also known as Kamanalinga. Devotees carry the holy water of the Ganges from 
Sultanganj and both the idol of Baidyanath in the months of Shravana and 
Bhadrapaksha according to the Hindu calendar. 
Lord Shiva took his tenth incarnation to kill the demon Daruk who used to live 
in Daruk forest. 
A devotee who worships Nagesh, never faces any calamity. The eleventh 
incarnation of Lord Shiva was as Rameshwar linga, this linga was established 
by Sri Rama while the construction of a bridge over the sea was going on. 
Having a darshan of this Jyotirlinga bestowes both worldly pleasures and 
salvation. 
Lord Shiva took his twelfth incarnation as Dhumeshwar after being pleased by 
Dhushma - the wife of Sumedha. Having a darshan of this Jyotirlinga helps a 
devotee to fulfill all of his desires. 
All the above mentioned twelve Jyotirlingas are very sacred and give total 
accomplishment to the devotees. 
 
PART FOUR  
KOTI RUDRA SAMHITA - THE GREATNESS OF 'UPALINGAS'  
After describing about the twelve Jyotirlinga, Suta mentioned about the 
various Upalingas originating from them. The Upalinga named Someshwar is 
situated at a place where the earth meets the ocean. This Upalinga is also 
known as 'Antakesh'. 
The Upalinga originating from MallikArjuna is famous by the name of 
'Rudreshwar'. Similarly the Upalinga originating from Mahakal Jyotirlinga is 
known as 'Dughdhesh'. The Upalinga manifesting from Omkar jyotirlinga is 
famous as 'Kardameshwar'. The Upalinga manifesting from Kedareshwar 
jyotirlinga is known as Bhuteshwar and is situated at the bank of Yamuna 
River. 

381 
 



The Upalinga manifesting from Bhima Shankar Jyotirlinga is famously known 
as 'Bheemeshwar'. The Upalingas manifesting from Nageshwar, Rameshwar 
and Dhushmeshwar Jyotirlingas are known as Bhuteshwar, Gupteshwar and 
Vyagreshwar respectively. 
All these upalingas are considered to be very sacred. A devotee who has 
darshan of these Upalingas gets liberated from all of his sins. 
Apart from these twelve Jyotirlingas and Upalingas, there are numerous other 
lingas, which have great religious importance. They are Kritikavaseshwar, 
Tilmandeshwar, Bhuteshwar, Batukeshwar, Pureshwar, Siddhanateshwar, 
Sringeshwar, Gopeshwar, Rangeshwar, Rameshwar, Atrishwar, Mahabal Linga 
Kameshwar, Ganeshwar, Shukreshwar, Chandrashekar, Rishishwar, 
Laliteshwar, Pashupatishwar, (Pashupatinath), Kumtinath and Andhakeshwar 
etc. 
ATRI AND ANUSUYA DO PENANACE  
Sage Atri and his wife Anusuya were doing penance in the forest called 
Kamad, situated near the Chitrakut mountain.  
Once it did not rain for many days. As a result people living in that area faced 
a severe drought. 
Anusuya requested her husband to help out the people from their hardships. 
Sage Atri sat down to meditate. One by one, his disciples deserted him. Only 
Anusuya remained with him. She spent her days worshipping the Parthiva 
lingas and circumambulating sage Atri who was engrossed in his meditation. 
She had vowed not to have a single morsel of food till it rained. 
All the deities became very pleased with their penance. They arrived at the 
place where both of them were doing penance and after giving blessings went 
back to their respective abodes. 
Lord Shiva and river Ganges stayed there. It did not rain for fifty four years. 
Both sage Atri and Anusuya continued with their respective penance. 

382 
 



While doing penance, sage Atri felt thirsty. He requested Anusuya to fetch 
some water. Anusuya went with a Kamandal, in search of water but did not 
find it anywhere. 
Ganga appeared before her and said- "I am very pleased with you. You can 
demand anything from me you like." Anusuya demanded only a Kamandal full 
of water for her husband. Ganga instructed her to dig up a pit and when it was 
done she entered into that pit. Anusuya filled her Kamandal with the water 
from that pit and went back to her thirsty husband. 
After quenching his thirst, Atri enquired from Anusuya as to where did she 
find water. Anusuya narrated the whole story. Both of them then went back to 
the place where Anusuya had met Ganga. Both of them requested Ganga to 
stay at that very place. Ganga agreed to remain there on the condition that 
Anusuya donates all the virtues attained by her husband by worshipping Lord 
Shiva for one year. 
Anusuya donated all the virtues, without any hesitation. Lord Shiva became 
very much pleased by their charitable tendencies. He appeared before them. 
After eulogizing, Atri requested Lord Shiva to remain in his hermitage 
accompanied by Parvati. Lord Shiva agreed to do so. Ganga also stayed with 
them. Later on Atri performed a grand Yagya after the completion of which it 
rained heavily. Thus Atri ended the phase of drought by his tremendous 
penance. 
River Mandakani flows from that same 'Pit' which Anusuya had dugged up. 
The Shivalinga, which was worshipped by Anusuya during that time later on, 
came to be known as Atrishwar Linga. 
THE BRAHMIN WOMAN ATTAINS TO HEAVEN  
Once upon a time, there lived a Brahmin at a place called 'Karni' situated at 
the bank of river 'Reva'. When the Brahmin became old, he went to Kashi after 
leaving behind his wife to live with his sons. After sometime the Brahmin died. 
When the Brahmins sons came to know about his death, they went to Kashi 
and performed his last rites. After some days the Brahmins woman died too. 

383 
 



The Brahmin's son - Suvas again went to Kashi carrying the ashes of their dead 
mother as per her own wish. 
On his way, Suvad became a guest of another Brahmin. Suvad witnessed an 
amazing even in the night, in which he saw his host trying to milk the cow. At 
first he allowed the calf to drink the cow's milk for sometime. His host then 
moved away the calf from the cow. The calf was still hungry and was not 
willing to move away from the cow. The Brahmins trashed the calf very badly. 
This made the cow very sad and vowed to teach that wicked Brahmin a lesson. 
The calf tried his best to convince his mother against doing this as her action 
might make her commit the gravest of sins - the Brahmahatya. But the cow 
was not worried, as she knew the method of nullifying that sin. 
Suvad was surprised that the cow knew the method of nullifying the sin of 
Brahmahatya. Next morning, the Brahmin entrusted the job of milking the 
cow, the Brahmins' son gave a severe trashing to the calf who was unwilling to 
move away from his mother. 
The angry cow lifted the Brahmin's son with her horns and dashed him against 
the ground. The Brahmin's son died on the spot. When the Brahmin returned 
to his home he became very furious on seeing his son dead. He drove both the 
cow and the calf out of his house, after beating them very badly. 
The colour of the cow had turned blue due to the trashing she got from her 
Brahmin. The cow went to the temple of Nandikeshwar, situated at the bank 
of river Narmada. To neutralize the sin of Brahmahatya she took dip in the 
water of river Narmada for three times. As a result she regained her original 
colour. 
Suvad had followed the cow all along the way. He was amazed to see the cow 
regaining her original colour. He proceeded on his further journey towards 
Kashi. He met a beautiful lady on the way who enquired as to where was he 
going. Suvad told her that he was going to immense the ashes of her mother 
in the holy water of the river Ganges. 

384 
 



The lady advised him to immerse the ashes in the water of Narmada itself, as 
the holy Ganga herself comes to meet Narmada on the seventh day of 
Vaishakh every year. 
"Today is the same auspicious day when the holy Ganga will be coming to 
meet Narmada." Said the beautiful woman. She also told him that immersing 
the ashes in the waters of Narmada would help his mother to attain to the 
divine abode. 
This beautiful lady was none other than Ganga herself. After advising Suvad 
she disappeared. 
Suvad followed the instruction of that beautiful lady. He immersed the ashes 
in the waters of Narmada. He saw his mother attaining a divine body. His 
mother blessed Suvad and then attained to the abode of Lord Shiva. 
MAHABAL SHIVALINGA  
Describing about Mahabal Shivalinga, Suta said to the sages- "Mahabal 
Shivalinga is situated at Gokarna area. A devotee who has a darshan of 
Mahabal Shivalinga on the eighth or fourteenth day of 'Ardranakshatra falling 
on Monday, becomes free from all of his sins and attains to the Shivaloka." 
Having a darshan of this Shivalinga on any other day too helps a man to attain 
to the abode of Almighty. All the deities, ancestors, holy rivers like Ganga and 
the Nagas stand guard on all the four entrances of Mahabal temple”  
“Even the most degraded sinner attains salvation if he worships Mahabal 
Shivalinga on the fourteenth day of Magha (dark lunar phase). On this day 
people come from all over India to see the grand festival." THE REASON 
BEHIND PHALLIC WORSHIP The sages curiously asked Suta about the purpose 
with which Parvati had decided to appear in the form of a Vagina. Suta 
narrated the following tale: "Long long ago, some sages used to do penance in 
a Shiva temple situated near Daruk forest. 
One day they went to collect woods needed for the Yagya. Lord Shiva wanted 
to test their devotion, so he arrived before the sages' wives in naked position 
holding his own phallus in his hand. The wives of the sages became frightened 

385 
 



by Shiva's appearance. "When the sages returned after collecting woods, they 
became very furious to see a naked person luring their wives. They asked 
Shiva to reveal his identity. When Shiva did not give any reply, they cursed him 
to become a phallus.”  
“The Phallus fell down from the hand of Lord Shiva and generated so much of 
heat that all the three worlds started to burn. The sages became very nervous 
and went to seek the help of Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma revealed to then that 
the person who they cursed was none other than Lord Shiva himself. He also 
instructed them to please Goddess Parvati, as she only could have them from 
Shiva's wrath by appearing in the form of Vagina and holding the Phallus.”  
“The sages followed the instruction of Lord Brahma. Goddess Parvati 
appeared in the form of Vagina and held Shiva's phallus in herself. The sages 
then worshipped the Shivalinga. This jyotirlinga became famous by the name 
of Hatkeshwar."  
THE ORIGIN OF BATUKNATH  
Long long ago there lived a Brahmin by the name of Dadhichi. His wife to a low 
caste, though his son - Sudarshan was very learned. The name of his wife was 
Tukula. She had her husband under total control and influence. 
Sudarshan had four sons. One day Dadhichi planned to go out due to some 
work. He entrusted the job of Shiva's worship to Sudarshan. Sudarshan 
worshipped the idol of Shiva daily without any fail. 
On the Shivaratri day, Sudarshan too had observed a fast like rest of his family 
members. He worshipped Shiva's idol in the morning as usual and then went 
to his home. During the night time, he had a sexual relationship with his wife. 
After that, he sat down to worship without purifying himself. Lord Shiva 
became very furious by his action. He immobilized him by his curse. 
Dadhichi was very sad to see the condition of his son. He commenced a 
tremendous penance to please Goddess Parvati. After being pleased by his 
penance, Parvati requested Lord Shiva to liberate Sudarshan from his curse. 

386 
 



Lord Shiva became pleased and blessed Sudarshan by saying that he would 
become famous as Batuknath and also that the worship of Batuknath would 
amount to the worship of Lord Shiva. 
THE ORIGIN OF SOMNATH  
The moon had twenty seven wives, one of whom was Rohini. The moon loved 
Rohini very much, which made the rest of his wives very jealous and angry. 
They went to their father - Daksha and complained about Moon's behaviour. 
Daksha went to Moon and advised him to give proper attention to all of his 
wives. But it did not have any effect on him and he continued giving special 
treatment to Rohini. When Daksha came to know about this, he became very 
curious. He cursed Moon to become weak and devoid of radiance. The moon 
then sent the deities to Lord Brahma to seek his help. At first, Lord Brahma 
became very angry with Moon, but later on he cooled down and told the 
deities, that Moon can get liberated from the curse, if he chants 
'Mahamrityunjaya mantra' by going to Prabhus area. 
Moon went to Prabhas area and chanted Mahamrityunjaya mantra for ten 
crore time after sitting in one posture. Lord Shiva appeared before him and 
asked him to demand anything he wished. 
Moon requested Lord Shiva to liberate him from the curse given by Daksha. 
Lord Shiva told moon that the words of Daksha can never became untrue. 
However he blessed moon by saying that he would wane during the dark lunar 
phase due to the curse, but wax during the dark lunar phase due to his 
(Shiva's) blessings. Lord Shiva also provided moon that he would be present 
along with Parvati near him (moon). 
Thus Lord Shiva established himself as Somanath. The deities constructed a 
'Kunda' named Chandrakunda. It is believed that the Moon because liberated 
from the curse by taking a bath in this Punda. 
THE ORIGIN OF MALLIKARJUNA  

387 
 



Once, under the influence of Sage Narada, Kartikeya had gone to the Kraunch 
Mountain to do penance. Shiva and Parvati could not bear the pain of his 
separation for long. Both of them went to the Kraunch mountain to see him. 
When Kartikeya saw them coming he moved to some other place. When Lord 
Shiva saw this he established himself in the form of Jyotirlinga, which later on 
became famous as MallikArjuna jyotirlinga. 
THE ORIGIN OF MAHAKALESHWAR  
There used to live a Brahmin at Avantikapuri. He was a great devotee of Lord 
Shiva and used to worship daily. 
This Brahmin had four sons whose names were Devapriya, Medhapriya, Sukrit 
and Dharmabahu. 
By the blessings of Lord Shiva the Brahmin enjoyed a very happy and 
contented life. After his death, the Brahmin's son continued the tradition of 
Shiva's worship. 
There was a mountain named Ratanak on which a demon named Dushan used 
to live. Being intoxicated by the boons received from Lord Brahma, he used to 
torment all the people. He had all the surrounding area under his control 
except the house in which the Brahmin family lived. 
Dushan ordered his fellow demons to bring the Brahmin after capturing them. 
All the demons went to Avantikapuri and created havoc. They went to the 
Brahmins and told them about Dushan's order. The Brahmins were busy doing 
worship at that time so they did not give ear to their words. The Brahmins 
continued with their worship. The demon became very angry and tried to 
attack them. 
Suddenly the earth cracked with a tremendous sound and Lord Shiva 
manifested from within the cracks. He killed all the demons. He then went to 
the Ratnamala mountain and killed Dushan. He again returned to the 
Brahmins and expressed his desire of fulfilling their wishes. The Brahmins 
expressed their desire of getting liberated from the bondage's of this world. 

388 
 



They also requested him to remain at that place. Lord Shiva accepted their 
request and established himself in the form of Mahakal. 
THE ORIGIN OF OMKARESHWAR  
Once, Narada had gone to meet Vindhya mountain. Vindhya was very 
arrogant in his behaviour. 
Narada told him that Sumeru mountain was even greater than him and so his 
false pride had no basis. 
Vindhya became very dejected and disheartened. He went to Amgreshwar 
and started worshipping Shiva after making a Parthiv linga. Lord Shiva became 
very pleased by his penance. 
He appeared before Vindhya and blessed him. After sometime the sages too 
arrived there and worshipped Shiva. They requested Lord Shiva to remain at 
that place forever. Lord Shiva established himself as Paremeshwar Linga. One 
Shivalinga already existed at Amareshwar, which became famous as 
Omkareshwar. 
THE ORIGIN OF KEDARESHWAR  
Two incarnations of Lord Vishnu by the names of Nara and Vishnu did 
penance at Badrikasharama. Both of them used to worship the idol of Shiva 
daily. Lord Shiva used to arrive in his subtle form and accept their offerings 
without being noticed by them. 
One day Lord Shiva appeared before them. Nara and Narayana eulogized him 
and requested to remain at that place forever. Lord Shiva accepted their 
request and established himself as 'Kedareshwar jyotirlinga'. 
THE ORIGIN OF BHIMA SHANKAR  
Bhima - the demon, was the son of Kumbhakarna and Karkati. After 
Kumbhakarna was killed by Sri Rama. Karkati and Bhima went to live at Sahya 
mountain. 
When Bhima grew up he asked Karkati about his father. Karkati told him that 
his father had been killed by Rama. Bhima swore to avenge his father's death. 

389 
 



He did a tremendous penance to please Lord Brahma. Brahma appeared 
before him and blessed him with insurmountable power and strength. 
Bhima then drove out the deities from heaven. He went to Kamarupa and 
defeated the king. He captured the king and put him in prison. The helpless 
king used to pass his time by chanting the mantra- Om Namah Shivay. His wife 
worshipped the Parthiva linga of Shiva for the release of the king. 
All the deities went at the bank of river Mahakeshi and worshipped the 
Parthiva linga of Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva appeared before them and assured 
them that the end of Bhima was near. 
Lord Shiva went to the king who had been held captive by Bhima. His ganas 
too accompanied him. All of them waited for the opportune time to kill Bhima. 
Meanwhile somebody informed Bhima that the king was doing worship of 
Shiva in the prison, with the objective of getting Bhima killed. 
Bhima arrived at the spot in the prison where the king was worshipping the 
Parthiva linga of Lord Shiva. He made fun of Shiva and struck the Shivalinga 
with his sword. 
Right then, Lord Shiva appeared. A tremendous battle was fought between 
both of them. The battle continued for a long period. Sage Narada requested 
Lord Shiva to kill Bhima as soon as it was possible. 
Lord Shiva produced fire by his loud roar. In a very short time the fire spread 
in the whole forest. 
All the demons including Bhima were burnt to death. The deities and the 
sages arrived there. 
They requested Lord Shiva to remain there. Lord Shiva accepted their request 
and established himself in the form of Bhima Shankar Jyotirlinga. 
THE ORIGIN OF VISHVESHWAR  
With the desire of giving liberation to the living creatures of this world, Lord 
Shiva had kept some portion of land on his Trishul after separating it from the 
rest of Brahma's creation. The name of this sacred place is Manikarnika. The 

390 
 



Shivalinga by the name of Avinukta was established by Lord Shiva himself. 
Later on this sacred place was brought down from the Trishul and established 
on the land of Shiva. This sacred place of pilgrimage later on became famous 
as Kashi and the Shivalinga as Avimukta Visheshwar. 
THE ORIGIN OF TRAYAMBAKESHWAR  
During the ancient time there lived a famous sage named Gautami. The name 
of his wife was Ahilya.  
Once it did not rain for one hundred years as the result of which the whole 
area was affected by drought. 
Sage Gautami did a tremendous penance to please Varuna appeared before 
Gautam, he was requested to cause rain. But Varuna expressed his inability in 
causing rain. He told Gautam to please Lord Shiva so that his wish could be 
fulfilled. Later on Varuna instructed Gautam to dig a up a pit, which he 
(Varuna) filled with water. Varuna blessed Gautam by saying that this pond 
would never dry up. The sages who had abandoned that place returned there. 
Everybody became happy and satisfied. One day, sage Gautam instructed his 
disciples to fetch some water from that pond. When the disciples reached 
there, they found the wives of numerous sages present at the bank of the 
pond. 
The sages' wives did not allow them to take water and instead they rebuked 
them. The disciples returned back to the hermitage and narrated the whole 
story to sage Gautam. 
Ahilya pacified the angry disciples and went to the pond to fetch water. From 
that day onwards this became very daily routine. One day Ahilya met the 
wives of the sages. They tried to prevent her from fetching water. Not only 
that they went back to his respective hermitages and filled the ears of their 
husbands. All the sages became very angry. 
The sages worshipped Lord Ganesha to please him. When Ganesha appeared, 
they requested him to drive Gautam out from that place. At first Ganesha was 

391 
 



reluctant to accept their demand but when they kept a persisting he agreed at 
last. 
Ganesha entered the field of Gautam in which barley was being cultivated. 
Ganesha had disguised himself as a cow. He started grazing the barley crops. 
When Gautam saw the cow grazing crops, he tried to drive her out from the 
field by hitting a grass on her back. The artificial cow died instantly. Gautam 
was very sorry for his act. 
Meanwhile all the sages from the surrounding area arrived there. They forced 
Gautam to abandon that place at once. 
Gautam left that place and made his hermitage at a little distance from there. 
One day he came to the sages and asked them as to how could he atone for 
his sins. The sages told him that his sins could be atoned only when he 
circumambulates the whole earth thrice, all the while saying, 'I have killed a 
cow'. They also told him that after that he would have to perform austerities 
for one month. 
If this is not possible then you will have to help Ganga manifest herself and 
take bath in her water. Otherwise you will have to worship three crores 
Parthiva lingas. Only then, you can get liberated from the sin of killing a cow," 
said the sages. 
Gautam made the Parthiva lingas and started worshipping them. Lord Shiva 
became very pleased by his devotion and appeared before him. Sage Gautam 
requested Lord Shiva to liberate him from the sins of killing a cow. He also 
requested Lord Shiva to manifest the stream of river Ganga that place. 
Lord Shiva tried his best to make him understand that he was innocent and 
the real culprits that he was innocent and the real culprits were those wicked 
sages. But, Gautam was unconvinced. At last Lord Shiva instructed Ganga to 
appear in the form of a woman. Gautam eulogized Ganga. By the blessings of 
Lord Shiva Gautam was liberated from his sins of killing a cow. After that 
Ganga expressed her desire to go back but Lord Shiva asked her to remain on 
the earth till the twentyeighth nanvantar. Ganga accepted to do that, on the 

392 
 



condition that Lord Shiva along with Parvati too would remain present on the 
earth. Lord Shiva established himself as Trayambakeshwar Jyotirlinga and 
Ganga became famous as Gautami Ganga.  
THE ORIGIN OF BAIDYANATH  
The demon king- Ravana did a tremendous penance to please Lord Shiva and 
to get a boon from him. Even after his severe penance when Lord Shiva did 
still not appear, he started offering his heads one by one to Lord Shiva. This 
way he already severed his nine heads and offered them to Shiva. When he 
was about to severe his last remaining head, just the Lord Shiva appeared 
before him. He blessed Ravana with unparalleled power and strength. Lord 
Shiva also made him a ten headed demon once again. 
But Ravana was not satisfied. He requested Lord Shiva to come along with him 
to Lanka. Lord Shiva gave Ravana s Shivalinga and warned him against keeping 
it on the earth, as then no power on the earth could lift that Shivalinga from 
there. 
Ravana proceeded with the Shivalinga. On the way he felt the urge to urinate. 
Ravana gave that Shivalinga to a cowherd boy and went to urinate. The 
cowherd boy held the Shivalinga for sometime. He felt that the Shivalinga was 
becoming heavier and heavier. He could not bear the weight of the Shivalinga 
for too long. He kept it on the ground. When Ravana returned he became very 
sad after seeing the Shivalinga on the ground. He knew that, now it was 
impossible to lift it from that place. Ravana established the Shivalinga there, 
which became famous as 'Baidyanath jyotirlinga'. 
THE ORIGIN OF NAGESHWAR JYOTIRLINGA  
During ancient times, there lived a demon named Daruk. The name of his wife 
was Daruka. 
They used to torment the people living in that area. The residents of that area 
went to sage 'Aursh' and narrated about their miseries and requested him to 
end this menace. 

393 
 



'Aursh' assured them that very soon their hardships would come to an end. He 
then went to do his penance. The deities appeared before him after being 
pleased by his tremendous penance. Sage 'Aursh' requested the deities to kill 
the demons. 
The deities went to fight with the demons. The demons got scarred and 
started thinking about the means by which their lives could be saved. Daruka 
the wife of Daruk had received a boon from Goddess Parvati due to which she 
had gained unparalleled power. She carried the whole forest and placed it in 
the middle of the sea. This way the demons again lived without being 
perturbed by the threat of the deities' attack. 
One day the demons saw many boats sailing in the sea, on which were many 
people on board. 
The demons made all the people captive. There was a man named Supriya 
who was great devotee of Lord Shiva. He used to worship Lord Shiva daily, 
even though he saw held under captivity. Rest of the people too got 
influenced by his devotion and everybody started worshipping Lord Shiva.This 
way, six months had passed. 
One day a demon saw Supriya worshipping the idol of Lord Shiva. He went to 
Daruk and informed him. Daruk became extremely furious. He asked Supriya 
as to whom was he worshipping. Supriya still engrossed in his worship did not 
give any reply. This made Daruk even more angry. He tried to kill Supriya. Lord 
Shiva appeared and killed all the demons. 
Daruka's heart became full of grief at the news of her husband's death. She 
went to Parvati and told her how Lord Shiva had killed Daruka. Parvati met 
Lord Shiva and both of them decided to protect there respective devotees by 
establishing themselves at that place. Thus, Nageshwar jyotirlinga came into 
existence. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF RAMESHWAR  

394 
 



After Hanuman brought the new that Sita had been held captive by Ravana at 
Lanka, Sri Rama proceeded towards Lanka with a huge army. After receiving 
the seashore he faced the problems of crossing over the sea. 
Sri Rama made a Parthiva linga of Shiva and worshipped it. Lord Shiva became 
very please with him and appeared. He blessed Sri Rama to be victorious. Sri 
Rama on the other hand, requested him to establish himself in that Parthiva 
linga, to which Lord Shiva agreed. This way 'Ramaeshwar jyotirlinga' came into 
existence. 
THE ORIGIN OF DHUSHMESH JYOTIRLINGA  
There used to live a Brahmin by the name of Sudharma, who belonged to the 
lineage of sage Bhardwaj. He was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. Sudeha was 
his wife. Sudharma had no son. 
Sudeha desires for a son. She expressed her desire to Sudharma but he did not 
listen to her pleas. 
One day Sudeha had gone for an outing accompanied by her companions. 
Incidentally a quarrel ensured among them and her companions made fun of 
her issue less status. Sudeha became very sad. After returning to her 
hermitage, she narrated the whole incident to Sudharma. 
Sudharma meditated on the form of Shiva and threw two flowers, towards his 
wife. He thought that if Sudeha picks up the flower, which he had thrown with 
his right hand, then certainly a son would be born. But if she picks up the 
another flower then there is no chance of her giving birth to a son. 
Unfortunately Sudeha picked up the flower which Sudharma had thrown with 
his left hand. 
Sudharma told his wife that she was never going to become a mother. He 
advised her to dedicate her life in the devotion of Lord Shiva. When Sudeha 
learnt that there was no chance of her becoming a mother, she insisted her 
husband to marry for a second time, so that he could become a father. But 
Sudharma refused to marry for the second. 

395 
 



Sudeha brought her younger sister-Dhushma to the hermitage and married 
her with reluctant Sudharma. Dhushma proved to be a very faithful wife. She 
engaged herself in the service of Sudharma and Sudeha. She also used to 
worship the Parthiva-linga of Shiva daily.After her worship she used to 
immerse the Parthiva lingas in a pond. This way, when she had accomplished 
the worship of one lakh Parthiva lingas, Lord Shiva blessed her with a son. 
Sudharma was extremely pleased but Sudeha became jealous of her own 
sister. 
When the child grew up, he was married to a beautiful Brahmin girl. Dhushma 
instructed the bride to take a special care of Sudeha. So the bride engaged 
herself in the service of everybody. 
She took special care of looking into the needs of Sudeha. But still, Sudeha's 
jealousy did not diminish. 
One day gripped by excessive jealousy and anger, she killed Dhushma's son 
while he was asleep. 
She cut his body into many pieces and threw those pieces into the same pond, 
in which Dhushma used to immerse the Parthiva lingas. 
When the daughter in law noticed a piece of flesh on the bed she started 
crying. She went to Dhushma and narrated the whole story. Hearing the news 
of her son's killing, Dhushma too started crying Sudeha also wept artificially. 
Sudharma arrived there. Though he himself was very sad yet he instructed 
Dhushma to do the daily worship of Parthiva linga as usual. Dhushma obeyed 
the command of her husband, She worshipped the Parthiva lingas and went to 
the pond of immense. 
By the blessings of Lord Shiva, her son was standing at the bank of the pond 
alive. He came towards his mother and said- "Mother! I have become alive 
even after my death." Dhushma was still engrossed in her thoughts of Lord 
Shiva, so she could not listen to her son. 

396 
 



Lord Shiva appeared and blessed Dhushma. He also expressed his desire to 
punish her wicked sister - Sudeha for her evil deed, but Dhushma requested 
him to forgive her. She also requested Lord Shiva to stay there forever. Lord 
Shiva accepted her demand and established himself in the form of 
Dhushmeshwar Jyotirlinga. Sudharma and Sudeha arrived at that place and 
worshipped Shiva. At last everybody returned home happily. 
LORD VISHNU RECEIVES SUDARSHAN CHAKRA  
The deities went to Lord Vishnu, after being tormented by the demons. They 
requested him to annihilate the demons. After assuring them, Lord Vishnu 
went to Kailash mountain to do his penance. But even his tremendous 
penance was not enough to please Lord Shiva. Lord Vishnu then worshipped 
Lord Shiva by chanting the mantras of Shiva Sahastranamavali. He also offered 
one thousand lotus flowers to Lord Shiva in course of his worship. 
One day Shiva wanted to test the devotion of Lord Vishnu. He stole one lotus 
flower from among the one thousand flowers. When Lord Vishnu began his 
worship he found that there was one flower less. To make up for this 
deficiency, he offered his one eye to Lord Shiva - his eye which has been 
compared with a lotus flower. Lord Shiva was very mush impressed by his 
exceptional devotion. He appeared before Vishnu and asked him to demand 
any boon he wished. Lord Vishnu demanded a divine weapon to annihilate the 
demons. Lord Shiva gave him a sparkling Sudharshan Chakra. On the request 
of Lord Vishnu he established himself in the form of Harishwar Shivalinga. At 
last Lord Vishnu killed the demon with his Sudarshan Chakra. 
Suta told the sages that Lord Vishnu had worshipped Lord Shiva with the help 
of his one thousand names. Some of the chief names of Shiva are Shiva, Har, 
Mrid, Rudra, Pushkar, Pushpalochan, Arthigamya, Sadachar, Sharv, Shambhu, 
Maheshwar, etc. 
A devotee who chants these one thousand names of Lord Shiva attains all the 
accomplishments. 

397 
 



Chanting it during distress helps a man to become free from all kings of 
misfortune. Lord Vishnu could kill the demons only because of the power he 
derived from the chanting of Sahastranam. 
THE DEVOTEES OF SHIVA  
Describing about the numerous devotees of Shiva who were famous for their 
devotion towards Lord Shiva, Suta named a few of them like Durvasa, 
Vishwamitra, Dadhichi, Gautam, Kanad, Bhargav, Brihaspati, Vaishampayam, 
Parashar, Vyasa, Upamanyu, Yagyavalkya, Jaimini and Garg etc. 
He also narrated a tale connected with King Sudyumna.  
Once Sudyumna had gone into that forest which was gifted to Parvati by Lord 
Shiva, with the warning that any man who dares to enter it would become a 
woman. 
As soon as Sudyumna entered that forest he got transformed into a woman. 
He became very sad. 
He worshipped Lord Shiva to regain his masculinity. Lord Shiva pleased by his 
devotion, he blessed him to be as a man for one month and again as a woman 
for the same period of time alternately. 
AUSTERITIES AND MAHASHIVARATRI FOR SHIVA'S WORSHIP  
Once Parvati asked Lord Shiva as to which were the austerities when on being 
performed by a devotee, helps him to attain both worldly accomplishments as 
well as liberation. 
Lord Shiva told her about ten austerities connected with his worship and their 
methods. He said- "On the eighth day of every month a devotee should 
worship me by observing a fast for the whole day and breaking it in the night. 
But on Kalashtami a devotee must observe the fast for the whole day and 
night. He must not have food on that day. On the eleventh day of the dark-
lunar month, a devotee must worship me and observe fast during the day. He 
should break the fast in the night. But on the eleventh day of the bright lunar 
month, a devotee should observe a fast for the whole period of day and night. 

398 
 



On the thirteenth day of dark-lunar month a devotee must observe fast for 
the whole period of day and night, whereas on the thirteenth day of a bright 
lunar phase he should observe a fast during the day and break it in the night. 
A fast observed on Monday should be broken only in the night." Lord Shiva 
continued with his statements- "Among all the austerities and fastings 
Mahashivaratri holds a supreme place. It falls on the fourteenth day of the 
dark lunar month of Phalgun. On this day the devotee should take a vow to 
observe a fast after awakening in the morning and finishing his daily choirs. He 
must observe a fast for the whole day and night. In the night he should 
worship me either in the temple or in his own home according to his 
convenience. He should worship me with the help of sixteen modes of 
worship (Shodasopachar). He should either chant the mantras of Laghurudra 
or perform 'abhishek' during the course of worship. While doing worship he 
should eulogize me and perform 'artis' in my praise. He can perform 'abhishek' 
with either of the followings - Milk, water, sacred water of belonging to a 
place of pilgrimage, sprinkling water with Kusha, Sugarcane juice, Honey and 
Ghee etc. The devotee should engage himself in my devotion for the whole 
day. In the end he should feed the Brahmins and make donation to them. A 
fast observed in this way gives infinite virtues to the devotee." After observing 
fasts for fourteen consecutive years on each of the Shivaratri days, a devotee 
should perform 'Uddyapan' (religious rites performed on the accomplishment 
of an observance). 
On the day preceding the Uddyapan ceremony, a devotee must have food for 
one time. The next day a devotee should perform Uddyapan after making a 
religious vow and according to the appropriate methods. A devotee who 
performs Uddyapan in the above mentioned way attains to the Shivaloka. 
THE GREATNESS OF SHIVARATRI  
There used to live a poor Bheel named Gurudruha. He was very poor. One day 
finding no food available in his house, he went to the forest to hunt an animal. 
Unfortunately he did not find any animal which he could hunt. 

399 
 



Being hungry, he sat down on the bank of a pond and pondered as to what 
would happen to his family members who were hungry too. He thought that if 
he waited there, then he might get a chance to kill a thirsty animal, which 
arrives there to drink water. 
Gurudruha climbed up a bael tree and waited for his prey. A Shivalinga was 
established just under that tree and co incidentally it was a Shivaratri day. 
When the first three hours of the night had passed, he saw a female deer 
arriving with her young ones. He got ready with his bow and arrow and aimed 
his arrow towards the female deer. By coincidence some leaves from that bael 
tree fell on the Shivalinga along with some drops of water from the vessel in 
which he was carrying water. Gurudruha had accomplished the worship of 
Shiva during the first 'Prahar' of the night unawaringly. 
After hearing the noise made by falling drops of water, the female deer looked 
up. She saw Gurudruha sitting with his bow and arrows. She asked him about 
his desire. Gurudruha told her that he wanted to kill her, so that he could feed 
his family members. The female deer requested him to allow her to go so that 
she could leave her young ones in the safe custody of her husband. She 
promised to come back. At first Gurudruha was reluctant but when the female 
deer started giving illustrations from the scriptures, he allowed her to go. 
Mean while the sister of female deer arrived there with her young ones. When 
Gurudruha sow her, he got ready to kill her. Suddenly his movements on the 
tree, made some leaves of bael and few drops of water to fall on the 
Shivalinga. It was the second Prahara of the night and Gurudruha had again 
performed the worshiped of Shiva unawaringly. 
When the female deer (Second) heard the noise made by falling drop of water 
She looked up towards Gurudruha. She asked him about his desire. When 
Gurudruha told about his desire, she requested him to allow her to go so that 
she could hand over her young ones in the safe custody of her husband. 
Initially, Gurudruha was reluctant to allow her to go, but when she promised 
to return back, he allowed her to go. 

400 
 



Gurudruha sat on the branches of the bael tree waiting for his prey. The 
second prahar of the night was coming to an end and the third prahar about 
to begin. 
The deer arrived there searching his wife and children. Gurudruha again made 
himself ready to kill that dear. Again some leaves and few drops of water fell 
on the Shivalinga. The worship of Shiva during the third Prahara had been 
accomplished by Gurudruha, though unawaringly. On hearing the noise made 
by the falling drops of water, the dear looked up and asked Gurudruha about 
his desire. Gurudruha told him about his desire. 
The deer requested Gurudruha to allow him to meet his wife and children for 
once. The deer promised to return back. After becoming satisfied by his 
intentions, Gurudruha allowed him to go to meet his family. 
Gurudruha sat on the bael tree waiting for the deers anxiously. The third 
prahar of the night was approaching its end and the fourth prahar was about 
to begin. 
Suddenly Gurudruha saw all the three deer's coming towards the pond. He 
became extremely pleased at the prospect of getting flesh of three animals. 
He got read with his bow and arrows. 
His movements on the bael tree again made some leaves and few drops of 
water to fall on the Shivaling. Gurudruha had successfully accomplished the 
worship of Shiva even during the fourth Prahar. Not only this he had also 
remained awake for the whole night of Shivaratri. 
The fast observed by Gurudruha on Shivaratri along with the worship of Shiva 
though unawaringly had made him on enlightened person. The thought of 
killing the deers remained no longer in his heart. He thanked all the deers for 
their help in his attainment of enlightenment. 
Lord Shiva became extremely pleased and appeared before him. He blessed 
Gurudruha that in his next birth he would get an opportunity to serve Sri 
Rama and would become famous as Nishad. Lord Shiva also told Gurudruha 
that by the blessings of Sri Rama he would attain salvation by the blessings of 

401 
 



Sri Rama he would attain salvation. Suta while describing about the virtues of 
observing fast on Shivaratri told the sages that if a fast observed unwaringly 
on Shivaratri gives such virtues then what could be said about a fast which is 
observed deliberately. According to Suta such a fast would bestow both 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 
DIFFERENT STAGES OF LIBERATION  
Regarding the different stages of liberation, Suta told the sages that there 
were five stages of liberation capable of freeing a man from the sorrows of 
this world. 1) Sarupya (Similitude with the Almighty), 2) Salokya, 3) Sannidhya 
(living in the proximity of the almighty), 4) Sayujya (getting united with the 
almight), 5) Kalvalya (Devotion towards God) Only Lord Shiva is capable of 
bestowing liberation. One can attain dharm (virtuosity), Artha (Wealth) and 
Kam (desires and wishes) by the worship of other deities, but Lord Shiva 
bestowes all the four of them. 
Lord Brahma is believed to be the master of the three elementary qualities i.e. 
Satva, Rajas, and Tamas. Shiva is beyond these qualities and even the nature 
itself. He is formless. Lord Shiva is a mystery which remains unsolved even 
though many sages and even Lord Brahma have tried to solve this mystery 
called Shiva. 
The fifth stage of liberation is called Kaivalya which is attained by having 
complete devotion towards Lord Shiva. In the present era of Kali, where the 
attainment of self knowledge is very difficult, devotion is relatively an easier 
path. 
Even devotion has been categorised into two types: a) Sagun (with form) b) 
Nirguna (formless) If man worships Lord Shiva with total devotion he attains 
self knowledge. Each and every objects of this world is nothing but the 
manifestation of Shiva's power. The creation achieves expansion only when he 
desires. Shiva is omniscient but himself invisible. Just as the fire, which already 
exists in the wood but is visible only after it is rubbed, similarly only the 
'Gyanis' can experience Lord Shiva even though he is omnipresent. Just as 

402 
 



there is no difference between cause and effect, but is appears so due to our 
ignorance, similarly an ignorant man can never experience the omnipresent 
Shiva by his sense organs. The living things possess ego but Lord Shiva is 
egoless. A man can successfully subjugates his ego by becoming 
knowledgeable and attains liberation after uniting with Lord Shiva. 
This knowledge was received by Lord Vishnu from Shiva. Lord Vishnu later on 
revealed it to Lord Brahma and Brahma in turn revealed it to his manasputra - 
Sanak, etc. The manasputra revealed this knowledge to Narada and Narada 
revealed it to Vyasa. 
PART FIVE UMA SAMHITA CONVERSATION BETWEEN KRISHNA and 
UPAMANYU 
Once, Lord Krishna went to Kailash mountain to do penance with the desire of 
having a son. He found MahaRishi Upamanyu engrossed in his meditation. He 
told Upamanyu about his desire and requested him to describe about the 
greatness of Lord Shiva. 
Upamanu described about his own experience when he had divine glimpses of 
Lord Shiva who was meditating " 
Once I saw Shiva who was surrounded by all the deities. Lord Shiva was 
engrossed in his deep meditation. Shiva had in his possession all the divine 
weapons like - Trident, Axe, Noose, Sudarshan etc. Lord Vishnu and Brahma 
were also present there. I eulogized Lord Shiva who became pleased with me. 
Lord Shiva wanted to bless me with a boon. I requested Lord Shiva to bless me 
with three things- 1) I should always remain his devotee 2) to be able to know 
about the past, present and future events, 3) My family should never feel the 
scarcity of rice and milk.”  
“Lord Shiva not only blessed me with all these three things, but also to be able 
to see the Vaivasvat kalpa." After completing his story, sage Upamanyu told 
Krishna he must worship Lord Shiva if he was desirous of a son, because Lord 
Shiva can be pleased quite easily. 
SRI KRISHNA DOES PENANCE  

403 
 



Sri Krishna then proceeded to do his penance after getting initiated by 
Upamanyu with the mantra - OM NAMAH SHIVAY. He did a tremendous 
penance for fifteen months by standing on his toe. In the sixteenth month 
Lord Shiva and Parvati appeared before him after being pleased by his 
penance. Lord Shiva expressed his desire to bless Krishna. Krishna demanded 
eight boons. 1) May his intelligence always remain inclined towards 
religiousness. 2) May he attain immortal fame, 3) May he has his abode in 
Shiva's proximity, 4) May his faith and devotion in Shiva be unswerving, 5) 
May he have ten valiant sons, 6) May he be victorious against his enemies, 7) 
May all his enemies be destroyed and 8) May be dear to all the yogis. After 
receiving eight boons from Lord Shiva, Krishna demanded one boon from 
Goddess Parvati. May he always be in the service of his parents and the 
Brahmins. Sri Krishna then went back to Upamanyu and narrated the whole 
story. At last he returned to Dwarka. 
CLASSIFICATION OF GRAVE SINS  
Describing about the sins, Suta told the sages that altogether there were 
twelve types of sins committed by a man by his actions, thought speech. Out 
of them having a desire for another person's wife, being desirous of another's 
wealth, having evil designs against other people and drifting towards sinful 
path are considered to be sins committed by one's thoughts. 
The following sins are supposed to be committed by speech - conversating 
with a woman who is having periods, telling lies, unpleasing talks and back 
biting. The following sins are committed by one's actions eating things, which 
are not worth eating's, indulging in violence and uncivilized activities and 
taking other's wealth by improper means. 
Even among all these sins some are considered to be graver, like criticizing 
teacher, hermit and parents etc, stealing the property of temple or a Brahmin. 
A person commits Mahapap (grave sin) if he indulges in any of the following: 
not having devotion towards one's preceptor abandoning one's preceptor, 
sleeping on the preceptor's bed, drinking intoxicating drinks, having illicit 

404 
 



relationship with one's teacher's wife, taking back the wealth which has 
already been donated, earning wealth by employing improper means. 
A man who commits the following sins are considered to be the grave sinners 
- burning a cowshed, a forest or a city, not marrying a girl with a suitable man, 
having illicit relationship with daughter in law, and sister in law. 
THE DESCRIPTION OF HELL  
Each living being has to taste the fruits of his 'Karmas', when his soul reaches 
the abode of Yama after his death. The soul of a virtuous man enters the hell 
from the Northern side, where as that of sinful man enters from the southern 
side. 
Yamanagri - The abode of Yama is situated at a distance of eighty six thousand 
yojans (One Yojans - Eight miles) from the surface of the earth. 
The virtuous soul reaches there without any problem because of his virtuous 
deeds. On the contrary, the soul of a sinner reaches Yamanagri tasting the 
fruits of his sins all along the way. 
Moreover, when the soul of a sinner reaches Yamanagri, it gets punished by 
the 'Yamadutas'. 
The Lord of death then gives the final judgement on the basis of each 
individual's sins. 
From the hell the virtuous soul leaves for the heaven. There are many 
categories of hells all filled up with filth. 
CHARITY AND ITS IMPORTANCE  
Suta while warning the sages told- "People who engages themselves in 
virtuous deeds through out their lives and who have been kind of others, cross 
the terrifying path of the hell quite easily. A person, who donates shoes or 
wooden sandals to Brahmins, reaches the hell riding on the horse. 
Similarly, a person who donates an umbrella to Brahmins reaches the hell 
under the shade of an umbrella. Making donations of bed or chairs to 
Brahmins, help a man to reach the hell after taking adequate rest on the way. 

405 
 



Making donations of Gold or silver to Brahmin helps a man to attain to 
heaven." A man who donated food grains enjoys all the pleasures of life, 
because food grains sustain life. 
Even, making donation of water is considered to be of supreme value because 
life can not exist without it. A man, who digs up wells and ponds for the 
benefit of people, acquires great virtues. 
Planting trees, especially which gives fruits or flowers are considered to give 
immeasurable virtues. 
Making donations of cow, land, knowledge and such objects that can be 
weighed are considered. 
Making donations of gold, sesame, elephant, girl, maid, servant, house, 
chariot, diamond, cow whose colour is pure white and food grains are 
considered to be Mahadan (great donation). The donations should be made 
only to worthy Brahmins. 
DESCRIPTION OF NETHERWORLD AND LIBERATION FROM HELL  
The earth is balanced on the hood of Sheshnag. Lord Vishnu is the nurturer of 
this world. There are seven more worlds beneath the earth, which are Atala, 
Vitala, Sutala, Rasatala, Tala, Talatala and Patal. Each of these worlds is ten 
thousand yojans in length and twenty thousand yojans deep. All these worlds 
are full of invaluable and priceless diamonds. The residents of each of these 
worlds enjoy all the luxuries and pleasures of life. The demons and the Nagas 
reside in these worlds. Even farther than these seven worlds is situated the 
hell, Where the soul of the sinner goes to after the death. Some of the main 
names of hell are - Raurav, Shukar, Rodh, Tal, Vivasan and Mahajwala etc. The 
soul of a sinner goes to each of these hells according to the magnitude of his 
sins. A man should worship Lord Shiva and sing hymns in his praise to get 
liberated from his sins. 
THE DESCRIPTION OF SEVEN - ISLANDS  
The whole earth is divided into seven islands or dweepas. The name of these 
islands is Jambu, Plaksha, Shalmali, Kraunch, Shaka and Pushkar. All these 

406 
 



islands are surrounded by such oceans on all sides. The content of each of 
these oceans is salt. Sugarcane juice, ghee, milk, curds and honey respectively. 
Jambudweepa is also known as India. It stretches from south of Himalaya to 
the north of ocean. 
The total area is about nine thousand yojans. It is further subdivided into nine 
land segments, seven mountains, and seven sacred rivers near the seven 
places of pilgrimage and many other rivers. 
Similarly the 'Plaksha' island is surrounded by ocean of salt on all sides and 
spread up in the area of one thousand yojans. 
The area of Shalmali island is twice as that of Plaksha island. It is surrounded 
by the ocean of honey. The are of Kusha island is twice as that of Shalmali 
island and is surrounded by the ocean of ghee. Similarly the Krauncha is 
surrounded by the ocean of curd and its area is thrice as that of Kusha island. 
The area of Shaka island is twice as that of Kraucha island and is surrounded 
by the ocean of milk. 
The ocean of sweet water surrounds the Pushkar island. Its total length is five 
thousand yojans and five lakh yojans respectively. The mountain Manas is 
situated in this island. The residents of these islands never attain old age. Lord 
Brahma resides in Mahaveet section of this island. The people living in this 
island get food without making any effort. 
THE DESCRIPTION OF PLANETS  
As far as the light of Sun and Moon reaches the earth, it is called 'Bhoo loka'. 
Surya loka is situated one lakh yojan above the Bhooloka. The Chandra loka is 
situated one lakh yojan above Surya loka. All the constellations as well as the 
planets are spread in the area of the ten thousand yojans above the Moon. 
Mercury is situated above the moon Venus above the Mercury and Mars is 
situated above the Venus. Jupiter is situated above Mars and Saturn above 
Jupiter. 

407 
 



The Saptarshi mandals are situated at a distance of one lakh yojan above 
Saturn. The 'Dhruva' is situated at a distance of one lakh yojan above the 
Saptarshi Mandals. All the planets are situated between the earth and Dhruva 
star in the form of three lokas – Bhoo loka, Bhuvar loka and Swarga loka 
(heaven). 
Mahar looka is situated even beyond the Dhruvaloka. This is the world where 
the manasputras (Sanak sanandan etc) of Lord Brahma reside. 
Jana loka is situated above Mahaloka where as the Tapaloka is situated at a 
distance of twenty six lakh yojans above Mahaloka. Satyaloka is situated six 
times the distance between Mahaloka and Tapaloka. Satyaloka is also known 
as Brahmaloka. Beyond Brahmaloka is situated the Vaikuntha loka. Similarly 
the world of Kartikeya Kumar loka is situated beyond Vaikunth loka. 
After Kumar loka comes the Uma loka and then comes the Shiva loka, which is 
the farthest loka. 
Goloka is situated near Shivaloka where Lord Krishna lives with the cow names 
Sushila, with the permission of Lord Shiva. 
CATEGORIES OF AUSTERITY OR TAPA  
Truth or Satya is the best among all the types of austerity. A truthful man is 
the supreme devotee and a great accomplisher. Austerity helps a man to 
attain all the worldly pleasures of life and ultimately salvation. Austerities 
have been classified into three types on the basis of three basic qualities or 
gunas i.e. Satvik tapa, Rajassi tapa and Tamassi tapa. 
Austerities observed by the deities' hermits and celibates come under the 
category of Satvik Tapa. Austerities maintained by the 'daityas' and man come 
under the category of Rajasi-Tapa. 
Austerities maintained by the demons and those people who indulge in evil 
and cruel deeds come under the category of Tamasi Tapa. 
THE ORIGIN OF BODY The food taken by a man gets transformed into semen 
in the body. The semen is transformed to the woman's womb during the time 

408 
 



of intercourse where it gets mixed with the blood. It then develops into an 
egg. Gradually all the organs start to manifest. The body then attains the vital 
force and ultimately comes out from the mother's womb after suffering great 
pains. But after taking birth he forgets all about those pains. He then lives his 
life by reaping the fruits of his past Karmas. Before taking birth, the body lives 
in a filthy environment in its mother's womb. It becomes so dirty that even 
Panchagavya can not make it pure. Remembrance of Shiva is the only means 
to make it pure. 
CONTROL OVER DEATH (ICHCHHA MRITYU)  
Suta told the sages that a person who wants to control death should first be 
seated on a pure seat. 
He should then perform Pranayama by holding his breath. While doing this 
exercise care should be taken that lamp is not burning. 
Both the ears should be shut by the index fingers for the period of one hour. 
After doing this he would be able to hear the sounds emerging from within. 
He should try to concentrate his mind on that sound. If this exercise is 
practiced daily for two hours, then he will have full control over his death. This 
particular exercise helps a man to attain great accomplishments, self-
knowledge and salvation. 
THE DESCENT OF GANGA  
Once, emperor Sagar performed an Ashwamedha Yagya. Indra abducted the 
horse used in this Yagya and kept it in the hermitage of Sage Kapila. All the 
sixty thousand sons of Sagar went to search the horse and found it in Kapila's 
hermitage. 
Hearing the commotion and noise, sage Kapila who was engrossed in his 
meditation opened his eyes and came out to see what was happening. He was 
very angry. He looked angrily towards the sons of Sagar. All of them were 
burnt to death except four. 
In due course of time, Sage Bhagirath became successful in bringing river 
Ganga to earth with the blessings of Lord Shiva. Bhagirath was the 

409 
 



descendants of Sagar. Bhagirath made all of his ancestors alive who had met 
an untimely death by sprinkling the water of Ganga on their bones. 
River Ganga is also known as Bhagirathi because of Bhagirath. 
THE AUSTERITIES OF VED VYASA 
Narrating about the life of Sage Veda Vyasa, Suta said to the sages- " 
Once while sage Parashar was on his pilgrimage, he arrived at the bank of 
Yamuna. Satyavati, who emitted the smell of fish, helped him cross the river. 
Sage Parashar was very pleased with her. He transformed the bad smell 
emitting from her body into fragrance. He also told her that she would be 
fortunate to give birth to a son as mighty as Lord Vishnu. 
In due course of time Satyavati gave birth to a child. The child was given the 
name Krishnadwaipayan by Satyavati's father. Soon after his birth the child 
told his mother that he was going to do penance and he would come back to 
see her the moment she desired. 
The child did tremendous penance and became famous as Veda Vyasa. With 
this deep knowledge and insight he categorized the different sections of Veda. 
After the accomplishment of his penance. Veda Vyasa went on a pilgrimage. 
He came to Kashi with a desire to write the Puranas. To get the blessings of 
Lord Shiva he worshipped the Madhyeshwar linga. Lord Shiva became pleased 
by his devotion and blessed him. Ved Vyasa created numerous Puranas like - 
Brahma Purana, Padma Purana, Vishnu Purana, Shiva Purana, Bhagavat 
Purana, Bhavishya Purana, Narada Purana, Markandeya Purana, Agni Purana, 
Brahma Vaivarta Purana, Linga Purana, Varaha Purana, Kurma Purana, Matsya 
Purana, Garuda Purana, Vamana Purana, Skanda Purana and Brahmanda 
Purana. 
INCARNATION OF MAHAKALI  
Once upon a time king Surath after loosing his kingdom to his enemy fled to 
the forest. After wandering for some time he reached the hermitage of sage 
Medha. He started living there, as he had no place to go. The dejected king 
used to pass his time wondering about his future. 

410 
 



One day, Surath met a man named Samadhi, who was driven out from his 
house by his own sons. His sons had captured all the wealth. Both of them 
went to sage Medha and narrated about their woeful tales. Sage Medha 
advised both of them to contemplate on the form of Mahamaya Bhagawati 
Surath and Samadhi were curious to know about Bhagawati Sage Medha said- 
"The demons, Madhu and Kailash were produced from the filth which came 
out from the ears of Lord Vishnu, while he was resting on the back of 
Sheshnag during the time of total annihilation.”  
“On seeing Lord Brahma sitting on the lotus flower, which emerged from the 
navel of Lord Vishnu, both the demons tried to kill him. Lord Brahma 
eulogized yoga nidra. So that Lord Vishnu could be awakened from the sleep. 
Goddess Bhagavati became pleased and told Brahma that in a short while 
from now she would be manifesting herself to kill the demons.”  
“Bhagavati manifested herself in the form of Kali from the mouth and eyes of 
Lord Vishnu. 
Meanwhile Lord Vishnu awakened from his sleep. He fought with the demons 
for one thousand years but could not defeat them. At last the demons told 
Lord Vishnu that they wanted to bless him with a boon. Lord Vishnu 
demanded their death. Seeing water on all sides the demons told him that he 
could kill them where no water was found. Lord Vishnu then severed their 
heads after laying them on his thighs." 
INCARNATION OF MAHALAKSHMI  
Mahishasur - the son of Rambhasur had captured the heaven after defeating 
the deities. The sorrowful deities came to seek the help of Lord Vishnu and 
Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva and Lord Vishnu became extremely furious after hearing about the 
misdeeds of Mahishasur. Radiant lights appeared from the bodies of Vishnu, 
Shiva and other deities and collectively manifested into a single form of 
Mahalakshmi. All the deities presented their respective weapons to her. 

411 
 



Mahalakshmi went to fight Mahishasur, who fought valiantly by changing his 
appearance, but ultimately got killed by her. The deities became very pleased 
by the death of Mahishasur. They eulogized and worshipped her. 
INCARNATION OF MAHASARASWATI  
After being tormented by the demons Shumbha and Nishumbha, the deities 
went to Goddess Parvati and requested her to protect them. Kaushiki 
manifested from the body of Goddess Parvati. 
Goddess Kaushiki assured the deities and disappeared. 
By coincidence the attendants of the demons - Shumbha and Nishumbha, 
happened to see Kaushiki and became enchanted by her divine beauty. They 
went to Shumbha and Nishumbha and praised about her beauty. 
Both the demons sent a messenger to Summon her. Kaushiki asked the 
messenger to convey the message to the demons that only such a person can 
become her lord, who defeats her in a battle. 
The messenger returned and gave the message to Shumbha and Nishumbha. 
Both the demons were enraged. They sent a huge army to bring Kaushiki 
forcible, under the commandership of Dhumralochan. When Dhumralochan 
reached there, he told her about his master's command. Kaushiki gave the 
some reply that only such a person can become her master, who defeats her 
in a battle. Dhumralochan then tried to abduct her forcibly. Kaushiki gave a 
loud roar in her anger as a result of which Dhumralochan was burnt to death. 
The whole army was annihilated by her vehicle-lion. 
When Shumbha and Nishumbha learnt about the death of Dhumralochan and 
the destruction of his army, they sent many mighty demons like Chanda, 
Munda, Raktabeeja etc to fight her. But each of them got killed by Goddess 
Kaushiki. 
Ultimately Shumbha and Nishumba themselves came forward to fight. Both of 
them attacked Kaushiki with volley of arrows. Kaushiki destroyed their whole 
army. The whole battlefield became flooded with blood. After that Kaushiki 

412 
 



killed Nishumbha with special types of arrows, which did not allow single drop 
of blood to fall on the ground. Angered by his brother's death, Shumbha 
attacked Kaushiks with his various weapons, but she neutralized all of them. 
At last, she killed Shumbha with her trident. 
UMA WARNS THE DEITIES  
Once, after having defeated the demons the deities had become very arrogant 
and proud. They started indulging in self praise. Suddenly they were started 
by the emergence of radiant light before them. All the deities became scarred 
and went to Indra. Indra sent Vayu to test the power of that radiant light. As 
soon as Vayu reached there, he found that he had become powerless. One by 
one all the deities came but returned after being defeated. At last Indra 
himself went there. 
As soon as Indra reached there, he found that he had become bereft of all his 
powers. Suddenly Goddess Uma manifested herself and warned Indra against 
becoming arrogant. Indra realized his mistake. 
THE INCARNATION OF SHAKAMBARI  
The most valiant demon Durgam had acquired all the four Vedas from Lord 
Brahma after pleasing him. Lord Brahma had also given a boon of invincibility 
to him. 
Durgam became very arrogant and started tormenting the whole world. As 
the consequence it did not rain for one hundred years and the whole world 
was hit by drought. 
The deities went to Goddess Maheshwari (Parvati) and narrated about their 
woeful tales. Goddess Maheshwari was so moved by their plights that tears 
rolled down from her eyes for nine continuous days and nights. The tear took 
the form of a river as the result of which the phase of drought came to an end. 
The deities then requested her to recover the Vedas, which were in 
possession of Durgam. They then went back to their abode. When Durgam 
saw that people were living happily, he attacked with a large army. At that 
very moment Goddess manifested herself and fought a tremendous battle 

413 
 



with Durgam. From her body manifested the ten Mahavidyas and many other 
Goddesses. 
At last Goddess Maheshwari killed Durgam with her trident and recovered the 
Vedas from his possession. She then handed over the Vedas to the deities. 
Maheshwari is also known as Shakambhari as she had created river by her 
tears and saved the lives of people. 
 
PART SIX  
KAILASH SAMHITA - CLASSIFICATIONS OF YOGA  
Describing about the various types of Yoga, Suta told the sages that there 
were three types of Yoga - Gyan Yoga, Kriya Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. "Each of 
them is capable of giving salvation to a man. When the mind or intellect unites 
with the soul it is called Gyan Yoga. When the soul gets attached with external 
objects, it is called Kriya yoga. The unification of one's whole being with 
Goddess Bhagawati is called Bhakti Yoga. All these three yogas combinedly are 
capable of giving salvation to a man. A man becomes a devotee by his actions 
or Karmas. Devotion or Bhakti helps a man to attain Jnana or knowledge. 
Jnana or Knowledge gives salvation. Yoga is the path through which a man can 
attain liberation whereas Kriya-yoga is the chief means to attain it. 
CONDUCTS OF A SANYASI  
A Sanyasi should wake up early in the morning. After getting up he should 
remember his preceptor or Guru and then he should pray to express his 
gratitude towards his Guru. 
After that he should practice Pranayama and try to concentrate his mind on 
the six chakras present in his bodies. 
After the completion of Pranayama and concentration on the six chakras he 
should finish his daily routines. After applying 'ashes' on his body he should 
chant the sacred mantras and perform 'tarpana'. Subsequently he should 
perform Achaman and then practice Pranayama for three times. 

414 
 



After that he should remember the sages or Rishis. While going to do worship, 
he should maintain silence all along the way. He should do worship only after 
washing his feet and performing Achaman. 
A Sanyasi should paste the ground with cow dung and construct a 
quadrangular 'Mandap'. He should then keep a broad leaf of Palm tree at its 
center. He should then fence the area with coloured threads from all the four 
directions. After that he should draw a eight petalled flower in the center of 
the Mandap, upon which he should draw a Shiva Yantra. At last he can 
commence his worship of the Sun God. 
THE GREATNESS OF PRANAV MANTRA  
Sage Vamadev was a great devotee of Lord Shiva from his birth. He never used 
to remain at a place for long. One day he had gone to a mountain peak named 
Kumar, which was situated towards the south of Sumeru Mountain. He met 
Kartikeya who revealed to him that Pranav Mantra directly signifies the 
almighty God. Kartikeya also told him that with the help of that mantra a 
person can attain Lord Shiva - who liberates from all the bondage of life. 
Though, Vamadeva himself knew about the power of Pranav mantra yet he 
requested Kartikeya to shed some more light on it. Kartikeya told him that any 
one could have the proximity of Lord Shiva, by the help of the means 
prescribed in the Shrutis and the Samritis. 
Regarding the methods of Shiva's worship, Kartikeya told Vamadeva that 
though Sadashiva was one, yet he was known by various names like 
Maheshwar, Rudra, Brahma and Vishnu. Mahesh was created from the 
thousandth part of Sadashiva. The Goddess of all illusions - Bhagawati dwells 
in the left side of Sadashiva, therefore he is the Lord of all the actions of the 
universe. 
Sadashiva plays his desire acts by indulging in creation, nurturement and 
annihilation of this world.  
INITIATION AND LAST RITES OF A SANYASI  

415 
 



Vamadeva requested Kartikeya to enlighten his mind with that knowledge, 
without which a Sanyasi can never attain liberation. 
Kartikeya then told him about the methods how a Sanyasi should get initiation 
from his guru. A disciple should worship his guru in any of the following 
months - Shravana, Ashwin, Kartik, Agahan and Magh. He should then 
establish a Kalash and worship it. He should again worship his guru 
considering him as the form of Shiva. 
The guru should then initiate him with the Shiva mantra. After getting the 
Mantra, the disciple should chant it considering himself as Shiva- Shivoaham. 
After this the disciple should get his head tonsured. The barber who is 
supposed to shave off the hairs should be given pure clothes to wear. The 
barber should also wash his hands with mud and water. The instruments and 
apparatus, which he is supposed to use, should be made pure by the 'Astra' 
mantras. 
First of all the front portion of the head should be shaved off after that the 
back portion of the head should be shaved off. The disciple should then get his 
beards and moustache shaved off. 
After this the disciple should massage his body with mud and take bath by 
taking twelve dips in a pond. After taking his bath he should worship his Guru 
and meditate on Lord Shiva. 
Kartikey told Sage Vamadev that an ascetic does not die but takes a Samadhi, 
therefore instead of being cremated he is buried. Therefore an ascetic must 
practice the art of Samadhi to perfection. If he has not yet perfected the art of 
Samadhi, then he should keep on practicing yoga till he attains mastery over 
the art of Samadhi. He should try to concentrate his mind on the Omkar 
mantra, which is eternal. If his body has become weak and feeble and 
incapable of doing physical exercises like Pranayama then he should indulge 
himself in Shiva remembrance. This way an ascetic can attain to heaven. After 
his death the rest of the ascetics should perform the rituals at his place of 
death for ten days. 

416 
 



An altar should be constructed on the eleventh day. Five quadrangular 
mandals should be made facing towards the northern direction. In each of 
these mandas, deities like Deveshwari, Atiwahak etc. should be established 
first and then worshipped. The worship should be done as per the instruction 
of Guru by offering 'Prasada'. This Prasada should be, given to a virgin girl or 
cow, later on. The articles used in the process of worship should be immersed 
in the river or pond. In this way, the Parvan shradha ceremony of the 
deceased ascetic is accomplished. It is worth nothing that 'Ekodishta' Shradha 
is not performed after an ascetic death. 
After the completion of 'Parvan Shradha' the ascetic should perform the 
Ekadashah Shradha as per the instructions of their Guru. On the twelfth day, 
the ascetics should invite the Brahmins, after getting up in the morning and 
taking their bath. These Brahmins should be feeded. 
The ascetics should then take a vow to worship their Guru by holding a 'Kusha' 
grass in their hands. After that, they should wash the lotus feets of their Guru 
and worship him. Even the worship of Guru's teacher should be done. After 
the worship is over, the Guru should get up by saying 'Shubhamastu'- 
benediction to all. He should then sprinkle the purified rice by chanting 
mantras. At last donations should be made to the invited Brahmins. 
 
PART SEVEN  
VAYVIYA SAMHITA - THE ORIGIN OF VIDYA (KNOWLEDGE) 
There are fourteen types of learning or Vidyas - four Vedas, Six Vedangs, 
Meemansa, Nyay, Puranas and other religious scriptures. These fourteen 
learning along with Ayurveda, Dhanurveda, Gandharvaveda and Arthashastra 
becomes eighteen. All these eighteen learning's originate from Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva created Lord Brahma to felicitate the process of creation and 
bestowed him with all these eighteen learning's. He also empowered Lord 
Vishnu to protect the creation. 

417 
 



The four Vedas emerged from the mouth of Lord Brahma, on the basis of 
which were created the numerous scriptures like Vedangs etc. Since these 
Vedas were difficult to understand, therefore Lord Vishnu took incarnation of 
Vyasa and created the Puranas, so that they could be understood easily. The 
Puranas contain four lakh shlokas and they help us to understand the essence 
of the Vedas. 
THE TALE OF NAIMISHARANYA  
Once, Lord Brahma released his Manomaya chakra and instructed the sages to 
follow it. He also told them that the place at which the Manomaya chakra 
broke down would be very auspicious for doing penance. 
The sages followed the Manomaya chakra, which after travelling for a long 
time fell down on a large segment of land and its circumference (Nemi) broke 
down as predicted by Lord Brahma. 
This segment of land became famous as Naimisharanya. 
The sages decided to perform a Yagya at that sacred place. This way the very 
place, sitting where Lord Brahma did creations. All the sages commenced their 
Yagya, which continued for ten thousand years. On the completion of Yagya, 
the deity arrived there and blessed them as per the instruction of Lord 
Brahma. 
TIME, CALCULATION, AND YUGAS  
Describing about the time (Kala), Vayudeva told the sages that 'Kala' or time is 
the radiance of Lord Shiva. Kala or time is also known as 'Kalatma'. The time 
flows smoothly without being disturbed. Time is under the control of Lord 
Shiva. Since the time contains the element of Shiva (Shivattatva), hence its 
momentum can not be checked by any other power, except that of Shiva. 
One, who understands the meaning of Kala, has a darshan of Lord Shiva. 
The smallest unit for measuring the time is called 'Nimesh'. The time taken to 
drop one's eyelid is called one Nimesh. A kala consists of fifteen Nimeshas and 
thirty Kalas make a 'Muhurta'. 

418 
 



A day and a night consist of thirty 'Muhurtas'. A month consists of thirty days, 
divided into two fortnights. One fortnight is known as 'Krishna Paksha (dark 
lunar phase) and the other is known as Shukla Paksha (bright lunar phase). 
In Pitarloka the day consists of one fortnight and night of the same number of 
days. Shukla Paksha is the day of the Pitraloka and Krishna Paksha the night. 
One 'Ayana' consists of Six months. A year consists of two 'Ayanas'. One year 
of the earth is equivalent to a day and a night of the deities. The six months 
when Sun is in the southern hemisphere of the earth, is actually the time 
when the deities experience night. On the contrary, the six months when sun 
is in the northern hemisphere, is the day time of the deities. One year of the 
deities is equivalent to three hundred and sixty years of this world. 
The yugas are counted on the basis of the years of the deities. According to 
the scholars there are four yugas - Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga and 
Kali Yuga. 
A Satya Yuga is equivalent to four thousand years of the deities. 
A Treta Yuga is equivalent to three thousand years of the deities. 
Similarly a Dwapar Yuga is equivalent to two thousand years of the deities and 
a Kali Yuga to that of one thousand years of the deities. 
This way all the four yugas collectively are equivalent to twelve thousand 
years of the deities. 
A Kalpa consists of one thousand Chaturyugas. A Manvantar consists of 
seventy one Chaturyugas. 
One Kalpa is inhibited by fourteen Manus one after another in succession. 
A Brahma's day is equivalent to one divine Kalpa. A Brahma's year is 
equivalent to one thousand Kalpas. A Brahma's yuga consists of eight 
thousand such years. 
A Brahma's 'Savan' consists of his one thousand yugas. Brahma's life span is 
complete after three thousand such Sawanas. Five lakh and forty thousand 
numbers of Indras succeed one after another during the whole life span of 

419 
 



Brahma. A Vishnu day is equivalent to the whole life span of Brahma. The 
whole life span of Vishnu is equivalent to a day of 'Rudra'. The whole life span 
of Rudra is equivalent to a day of Lord Shiva. 
In the whole life of Lord Shiva five lakh and four thousand numbers of Rudras 
come and go. 
A Shiva's day commences with the creation and before the end of the night 
the whole creation gets annihilated. Sadashiva is eternal. 
MEDITATION  
Describing about meditation Vayudeva told the sages that to concentrate 
one's restless mind during meditative state, a man needs some kind of form 
(Swarupa) or appearance. Idol worship is very helpful in this regard. If an idol 
of the deity is worshipped with full devotion, then a time comes when a man 
can have its sight even in an empty space. Idol worship also helps a devotee to 
reach towards the almighty God, who is formless. It is easy for a devotee who 
believes in 'Sakar' (with form) to change over to the Nirakar (formless) 
worship of God. But it is very difficult for a devotee who believes in the 
formless almighty to switch over to Sakar mode of worship. The knowledge of 
Shiva's essence is a must attain salvation in both the modes of devotion. 
PASHUPAT VRATA RITUALS CONNECTED WITH SHIVA'S WORSHIP  
One being asked by the sages about the rituals which gives salvation, 
Vayudeva told them that by having devotion towards Lord Shiva, a man can 
achieve all the pleasures of the world and even attain salvation. Vayudeva also 
told them about Pashupat Vrata and the benefits derived from it. 
The whole Pashupat Vrata is divided into five parts - Kriya, Taipei, Tapa, 
Dhyana and Gyan. The Shaiva-dharma is the supreme religion and the rituals 
pertaining to it are based on the Shruits and the Smritis. Pashupat Vrata has 
been mentioned in the Vedas as the bestower of Supreme knowledge. It also 
contains all the eight organs of yoga, which were created by Lord Shiva 
himself. Lord Shiva is easily pleased if worship is done by this method. The 

420 
 



devotee attains supreme knowledge and becomes liberated from all the 
bondage's of this world. 
Pashupat Vrata has been mentioned even in the Atharvasheersha Upanishad. 
It begins on the full moon day, in the month of Chaitra. It can be performed 
anywhere - a Shiva temple, any sacred place of pilgrimage, forest or garden. 
A devotee should get up early in the morning, on the thirteenth day of bright 
lunar phase (two days preceding the full moon day) and after finishing his 
daily duties he should make salutations to his Guru. With the permission of his 
guru, the devotee should then put on while coloured clothes and a sacred 
thread of the same colour. He should also wear a white garland around his 
neck and apply sandal wood paste on his body. He should then sit on the seat 
made of Kusha grass and take a vow by holding a Kusha grass in his hand. 
After this he should do Havana by offerings articles into the sacred fire. He 
should observe a fast for the whole day and break it only in the night by 
having 'Prasada'. 
This ritual should be repeated on the following day but the fast should not be 
broken in the night. 
On the final day, that is full moon day he should repeat all the rituals and after 
putting off the fire of the Havana Kunda, he should smear his body with the 
ashes. He should then take his bath and put on dear's skin or bark of the tree. 
He should also hold a stick and put on a waist band (Mekhala). After that he 
should again rinse (Achaman) his mouth and smear ashes on his body. 
He should perform the exercise of Ashtanga yoga. Three times in a day as per 
the instructions of his guru. This way a man is freed from the beastly qualities 
present in him. 
Pashupat Vrata can be performed by a devotee as long as he is alive or he can 
continue it for twelve years of three years or one year or six months or one 
month, or twelve days or three days or even one day. On the completion of 
Pashupat Vrata, a devotee should establish a Shiva idol and worship it with all 
the sixteen modes of worship. At last he should perform Awaran Pujan and 

421 
 



then worship his guru. Through out the period of fast, a devotee should have 
fruits only and he should sleep on the bare land. Pashupat Vrata done in such 
a way helps a devotee to attain to the abode of Lord Shiva. 
INTRODUCTION OF THE UNIVERSE  
Vayudeva told the sages who had assembled at Naimisharanya that Goddess 
Gauri was the manifestation of Shiva's power and Shankar the omnipotent 
almighty. Both Shiva and Goddess Shiva contain fathomless splendours of 
which only a fraction is visible in this world. This world is under the control of 
Shiva and Goddess Shiva. Both of them are inseparable. Just as the light of the 
sun can not exist without the Sun in the same way Goddess Shiva can not exist 
without Lord Shiva. Just as a lifeless body is of no use similarly the world can 
not exist without Goddess Shakti. 
This illusionary world is tied up with the delusionary ropes of Shiva and Shakti. 
The whole creation is the appearance of Almighty Shiva. The ignorant sages 
describe it in different ways according to their own perceptions. But, the fact 
is that Shiva is one and this world is the creation of his illusions. A man can 
attain liberation from this illusionary world only when he has the blessings of 
Shiva. 
Lord Shiva is beyond the reach of lust, attachment and pleasures. His 
existence is separate from the nature, delusion, intelligence and ego. He is 
free from all the bondage's. 
DUTIES OF A BRAHMIN  
An ideal Brahmin is supposed to perform the following duties:- a) Trikal 
Sandhya (worshipping thrice a day) b) Havan (offerings made to the sacred 
fire) c) Worship of Shivalinga d) Making donations A Brahmin should also have 
the following qualities:- a) To see God in each soul b)Compassion c) Virtuous 
conducts d) Satisfaction e) Belief in God f) Non violence g)Devotion h) Regular 
Vedas study i) Practicing Yoga j) Preaching teachings of Vedas k)Giving lectures 
on the religious scriptures. l) Being a celibate m) Penance n)Having a Shikha 
and a scared thread etc. 

422 
 



A Brahmin should never have food during the night and should contently 
chant the 'Om Namah Shivay' mantra. Lord Shiva is not pleased that much by 
rituals as by faith and devotion. A man who worships Lord Shiva while 
maintaining the rules of 'varna ashrama dharma', has the blessings of Lord 
Shiva and all of his desires are fulfilled. 
CHANTING OF MANTRAS AND ESTABLISHING DEITIES WITHIN BODY  
After getting initiated with the Shiva mantra, a devotee should chant it for 
once crore times or fifty lakh times, or twenty lakh times or ten lakh times, 
while worshipping Shiva. 'Havana' should be performed for tenth part of the 
total chanting. 'Tarpan' should be performed for tenth part of the number of 
Havana. Similarly 'Marjan' should be performed for the tenth part of the 
numbers of Tarpan. The numbers of Brahmins selected for feeding should be 
equivalent to the tenth part of the numbers of Marjan. 
At last the disciple should give donations to the Brahmins and engage himself 
in the welfare of society as per the instructions of his Guru. 
Asceticism (Nyas) are of three types - Sthiti (posture) Utpatti (origin) and Laya 
(fusion). 
Establishing and chanting the cryptic mantras (alphabets) from the thumb to 
the little finger is called 'Sthiti nyas'. 
Establishing and then chanting the cryptic mantras from the right thumb to 
the left thumb is called "Utpatti nyas'. 
Establishing and then chanting the cryptic mantras from the left thumb to the 
right thumb is called 'Laya Nyas'. 
'Sthiti' nyas should be practiced by the householders 'Utpatti nyas' should be 
practiced by the celibates 'Laya nyas' should be practiced by those people who 
have relinquished the world (Vanprasth). 
A widow should practice Sthiti Nyas. An unmarried girl should practice 
Utapatti Nyas. 
These modes of Nyas should be practiced only after being taught by the Guru. 

423 
 



MENTAL WORSHIP OF SHIVA 
While doing a mental worship of Shiva, a devotee should worship Lord 
Ganesha by following the 'Nyas' mode of worship. After that he should 
worship various deities related with Lord Shiva like Nandi etc. Then he should 
bring the form of Lord Shiva into his imagination and worship him mentally by 
making mental offerings. 
The devotee should then perform Havana in the navel of Lord Shiva by 
offering ghee. The worship should be accomplished by meditating on the form 
of Shiva. 
The devotee should take his seat only after purifying it. He should take a vow 
after completing all the necessary rituals like 'Achaman'. Pranayama, tying a 
knot in his Shikha. 
After doing the 'Deepa Pujan' he should worship various deities like Sun God, 
Moon God, Varuna, Ganesha and Kartikeya etc. He should then worship both 
Shiva and Shakti by employing all the sixteen modes of worship 
(Shodasopachar). The devotee should perform 'arti' in the end. 
In the specialized form of Shiva's worship 'Awaran Pujan' of Shiva is done 
along with the normal pujan. Awaran Pujan means worship of all the articles 
connected with Lord Shiva like his trident his drum etc. In this specialized 
worship the Shiva's idol should be bathed first of all. Then the idol should be 
clothed. A sacred thread should be offered to the Shiva's idol along with the 
other offerings like 'tilak', Akshat etc. After this the 'awaran pujan of Shiva 
should be done along with the worship of Shiva's family. 
If the devotee feels that something was lacking in the worship, he should 
atone for that mistake by chanting the Panchakshar mantra Om Namah 
Shivay. 
METHOD OF PERFORMING 'HAVANA'  
While performing a Shiva Yagya a devotee should make offerings to the 
'havanakunda' made of iron or mud. Fire should be ignited in the havankunda 

424 
 



following the methods as prescribed in the scriptures. He can then commence 
the actual worship. 
The devotee should make of offerings of ghee with Sruva (a wooden spoon) 
and other articles with his hands. The offerings should be first made in the 
names of Lord Brahma (Prajapati) then to the nine planets and other deities. 
After that offerings should be made in the name of the chief deity. 
The devotee should then make nine offerings to each of the deities like Agni, 
Vayu and Surya etc. At last he should perform the arti and atone for those 
mistakes, which he might have committed during the whole process of 
worship. He should also give donations to the Brahmins and feed them. 
AUSPICIOUS DAYS FOR DOING SHIVA WORSHIP  
The eighth day and the fourteenth day of both the fortnights of each Hindu 
month are considered to be the most auspicious for the worship of Lord Shiva. 
Similarly the solstice day (Sankranti), when the sun is positioned north of 
equator and eclipse day are considered to be very auspicious. On these days a 
special worship of Lord Shiva should be done by bathing the Shiva idol with 
Panchagavya and having it is prasadam. It frees a man from the gravest of 
sins. Similarly the day of 'Pushya' Nakshatra falling in the month of 'Pausha' is 
considered as very auspicious and performing arti of Shiva on this day gives 
immense virtues. 
Making donations of Ghee and blankets on 'Magha Nakshatra' falling in the 
month of Magh gives immense virtues. 
The following days are considered to be the most auspicious for the worship 
of Lord Shiva. 
Uttara Falguni Nakshatra on the same day as Purnima, in the month of Falgun. 
Chitra Nakshatra falling on the same day as Purnima in the month of Chaitra. 
Vishakha Nakshatra falling on the same day as Purnima, in the month of 
Vaishakh. 
Moola Nakshatra falling in the month of Jyeshtha. 

425 
 



Uttarashadha Nakshatra falling in the month of 'Ashadha'. 
Shravana Nakshatra falling in the month of Shravana. 
Uttara bhadra Nakshatra falling in the month of 'Bhadra'. 
Purnima in the month of Ashwin. 
Kartika Nakshatra falling on the same day as Purnima in the month of Kartik. 
Ardra Nakshatra falling in the month of Margasheersha  
 
DESIRABLE RITUALS (KAMYA KARMA)  
Rituals can be categorized in to two types- 1) Rituals performed with the 
objective of fulfilling worldly desires. 2) Rituals pertaining to Ultra mundan 
desires. 
In general, rituals can be classified into five categories - rituals, penance, 
chanting of mantras, meditation, and all the four collectively. 
For performance of rituals a man needs power and strength and one can not 
achieve power unless and until Shiva wishes it. It is only with the blessings of 
Shiva that a man can attain both worldly pleasures as well as liberation. These 
rituals (Kamya Karma) are performed by making a mandal facing towards east 
and doing 'awaran pujan' as well as worship of Lord Shiva. Worship of Lord 
Shiva done in this way fulfills all the desires of a man. 
The methods for the worship of five 'awarans' of Shiva have been mentioned 
in Shivamahastotra. 
Each of the 'awarans' have separate presiding deities, the worship of which 
should be done according to the methods as described in the Shiva Purana or 
as per the instruction of Guru. 
INSTALLATION OF SHIVALINGA  
According to the scriptures, a Shivalinga should be made in an auspicious 
moment. The land, where the Shivalinga is supposed to be installed should be 
purified by performing 'BhoomiPujan'. 

426 
 



 After bhoomi-Pujan, worshipping Lord Ganesha should be done. After that, 
the Shivalinga should be purified by washing it with panchgavya and after 
worshipping it, it should be immersed in the water. 
The Shivalinga should be then taken out from the water and after worshipping 
it, it should be laid down on the bed meant for him. It should be then installed 
at the desired place and should be consecrated by chanting the mantras. All 
the rituals should be performed as per the instructions of Guru. 
CLASSIFICATION OF YOGA  
Yoga means such actions, which after pacifying all the human tendencies 
helps a man to unite with Shiva. Following are the five divisions of yoga- 1) 
Mantra Yoga, 2) Sparsh Yoga (union of touch), 3) Bhava Yoga (union by 
devotion), 4) Abhava yoga (Union without being emotionally attached), 5) 
Mahayoga (The great union). 
Mantra yoga helps a man to understand the meaning of mantras and uniting 
with Shiva by the concentration of mind. When Mantra yoga is perfected by 
the practice of Pranayama it is called 'Sparshyoga'. Bhavayoga means 
meditating and chanting without uttering a word. Abhava yoga means such a 
union when the devotee contemplates on the final annihilation, without being 
emotionally attached with the world. 
A man whose mind is preoccupied with the thoughts of Shiva is supposed to 
have attained the state of Mahayoga. A yogi can unite with Shiva after 
purifying his body with the help of Pranayama etc. 
OBSTACLES AND DIVINE POWERS IN THE PATH OF YOGA 
There are possibilities of numerous obstacles being faced by a man who 
practices yoga like laziness, disease, carelessness, lack of concentration, 
confusion and sorrow etc. While practicing yoga, one must try to keep himself 
free from such demerits. 
After becoming liberated from these flaws a man can easily attain six types of 
accomplishment - talent (Pratibha), super power of hearing (Shravana), 
excellent conversational power and power of speech (Vrata), Divine sight 

427 
 



(Darshan), Divine power of taste (Aswad), Divine power of touch (Vedana). 
The capability of seeing things situated at distant places is called 'Pratibha'. 
The ability to listen without making any effort is called 'Shravana'. The ability 
to decipher the meaning of animal's language is called 'Vrata'. Being able to 
see divine things without making any effort is called 'Darshan'. The power, 
which enables a man to know about the taste of a thing without actually 
tasting it, is called 'Aswad'. 'Vedana' means the knowledge of all types of 
touch. 
A devotee can attain all types of accomplishment merely by having devotion 
towards Lord Shiva and by meditating on him. In the beginning, a yogi should 
try to meditate on the form of Shiva (Saguna), but later on the switch over to 
Shiva's formless (nirguna) quality. Meditating on nirguna form of Shiva is not 
easy. It can be mastered only by constant and steady practice. When 
mastered it bestows all kinds of accomplishment. Meditation combined with 
Pranayama gives four types of accomplishments peace (Shanti), tranquility 
(Prashanti), luster (Dipti) and boon (Prasad). A devotee can have a darshan of 
Lord Shiva if he does meditation with non attachment. 
SANATKUMAR RECEIVES SHIVA-GYAN FROM NANDI  
The sages thanked Vayudeva for giving the knowledge of Jnana Yoga. The next 
day, they took bath in river Saraswati and performed their worship and rituals. 
After that they proceeded towards Kashi. At Kashi after taking their bath in 
river Ganga they had a darshan of Lord Vishwanath. They saw very radiant 
effulgence appearing in the sky, in which they saw thousand sages who had 
accomplished Pashupat Vrata getting merged. The radiant effulgence 
vanished in no time. 
The sages were very curious to know about that radiant effulgence, so they 
went to Lord Brahma and asked him about it. Lord Brahma told them that the 
radiant effulgence had actually instructed them to accomplish Pashupat Vrata 
and attain Salvation. Lord Brahma then instructed them to go to the Sumeru 
mountain where Nandi was supposed to come and teach the methods of 
doing Pashupat Vrata to Sanatkumar. 

428 
 



Once Sanatkumar became very arrogant of his asceticism. One day Lord Shiva 
arrived at his place but Sanatkumar did not get up to greet him. At this Nandi 
became furious and cursed him to become a camel. Sanatkumar got 
transformed into a camel. Lord Brahma worshipped Shiva to liberate his son- 
Sanatkumar from the curse. Lord Shiva became pleased and blessed 
Sanatkumar, as the result of which he regained his human body. 
After regaining his human body Sanatkumar commenced a tremendous 
penance. Lord Shiva instructed Nandi to go to Sumeru mountain and preach 
Sanatkumar. The sages reached Sumeru mountain as per the instruction of 
Lord Brahma. They saw many sages meditating at the bank of a pond. They 
also saw Sanatkumar engrossed in his meditation at a little distance from the 
other meditating sages. 
The sages went near Sanatkumar and told him about their penances done for 
ten thousand years. They also revealed to him about the purpose of their 
arrival. Right then, Nandi arrived there, accompanied by his ganas Sanatkumar 
and all the sages welcomed him. Sanatkumar introduced all the sages to Nandi 
and told him about their tremendous penance done for ten thousand years. 
Nandi became very pleased and blessed them. He then preached Sanatkumar 
and all the sages on the Shiva tattva. 
Sanatkumar passed on that knowledge to Sage Vyasa, who again passed it on 
to Suta. Suta then revealed this knowledge to those sages who had assembled 
at Prayag. After receiving that knowledge from Suta all the sages went to 
Prayaga tirtha and took their bath. As they saw the signs of approaching Kali 
Yuga, they went to Kashi and performed the Pashupat Vrata. All of them 
attained liberation with the blessings of Lord Vishnu. 
Listening to Shiva Purana for one time liberates a man from all of his sins. 
Listening to it for two times helps him to develop devotion in Lord Shiva. 
Listening to Shiva Purana for three times, helps a man to attain to the abode 
of Shiva. 
Home   

429 
 



5. VAMANA PURANA  
INTRODUCTION  
Narada asks sage Pulastya about Vamana incarnation: Vamana Purana is one 
of the eighteen Puranas written by sage Vyasa. It contains tales pertaining to 
Lord Vishnu in his Vamana (dwarf) incarnation. Sage Pulastya while giving 
answers to Narada's enquiry narrates the tale of Vamana Purana. 
All the Puranas give glimpses of Indian civilization and culture and Vamana 
Purana is no exception. It also teaches the virtue of righteousness and 
religiousness. Vamana Purana not only contains the divine tales of Nara-
Narayana and Goddess Durga but it also contains tales of famous devotees 
like Prahlada, the salvation of Gajendra (elephant) etc. 
Sage Narada asks Pulastya- "O revered sage! Why did Sri Hari take the 
incarnation of Vamana? Why did Prahlada fight a battle with the deities 
despite being a devotee of Lord Vishnu? How did Sati, Daksha Prajapati's 
daughter become Mahadeva's consort in her next birth? I am eager to know 
the answers to all these questions." Pulastya replied- "O Narada!  
Once, Sati requested Lord Shankar to make arrangements for a permanent 
abode. At that time, Lord Shankar had his abode at Mandar Mountain. 
Summer season was approaching and Sati quite rightly had apprehensions of 
living in the open. Lord Shankar told her that as he was a recluse, he never felt 
a need of a permanent dwelling. Though Sati was not satisfied by his answers 
yet she kept quiet. This way, both of them continued to live there. The 
summer season had passed and now it was the turn of rainy season to arrive. 
Sati made the same request to Lord Shankar. This time, Lord Shankar told her 
that it was impossible for him to construct a house, as he had no wealth. He 
also told her that he had only a tiger skin as his clothing, the king cobra- his 
sacred thread, Padma and Pingal (snakes)- his ear-rings and Keval and 
Dhananjay as his armlets. 
After hearing this, Sati became worried as to how she would pass the rainy 
season without a home. Lord Shankar then assured her that this problem 

430 
 



would be easily solved if she lived above the clouds. This way, she would 
remain untouched by the showers. After this, both of them ascended towards 
the sky and started living above the clouds. From that day onwards, Lord 
Shankar came to be known as Jeebhootvahan (one whose vehicle is the 
cloud). 
 
TALES OF LORD SHIVA  
DAKSHA PERFORMS A GRAND YAGYA  
Pulastya says- "This way, both Shiva and Sati lived above the clouds till the end 
of rainy season. 
When autumn season arrived, both decided on returning to Mandar 
Mountain. Daksha had organised a grand Yagya in which he had invited all the 
prominent deities and sages except his own son-in-law, Shankar and his 
daughter, Sati." Narada was surprised as to why Maheshwar- the Lord of all 
splendours was not invited by Daksha. He was also curious to know why Lord 
Shankar had become a Kapali (a mendicant). 
Pulastya told him that during the period of final annihilation, Lord Vishnu after 
waking up from his sleep found a divine entity, who possessed three eyes, 
who had a trident in his hands and who wore a Rudraksha garland around his 
neck. Lord Vishnu then created ego, which had its evil effects on both Brahma 
and Shankar. Lord Shiva in his arrogance asked Brahma, his identity and origin. 
Lord Brahma then arrogantly asked Shankar, his identity. This way, a dispute 
ensued that later on turned into a fight in which, Brahma defeated Shankar. 
Lord Shiva severed two of the five heads of Lord Brahma. But the second head 
fell and got stuck on Lord Shiva's left palm. 
Angrily, Lord Brahma created a terrific creature, which challenged Shankar 
and ridiculed him by saying that as he (Shankar) was a sinner, therefore, he 
would not dirty his hands by killing him. 
Lord Shankar was ashamed of himself. He went to Badrikashrama and 
requested Lord Vishnu for some alms. Lord Vishnu asked Shankar to hit on his 

431 
 



(Vishnu's) left arm. Shankar hit Vishnu's left arm with his trident and the 
impact resulted in the creation of three streams. The first stream went up in 
the sky and established itself as Akashganga. The second one was Mandakini, 
which was received by sage Atri. The third stream fell on the skull, which was 
stuck in Lord Shankar's left palm. This resulted in the manifestation of a divine 
child who was ferocious and well armed with bow and arrows. Shankar 
instructed him to kill that creature, which was created by Brahma. 
A tremendous duel was fought between them, which was inconclusive for 
thousands of divine years. 
ATONEMENT OF LORD SHANKAR 
Lord Shiva had committed a grave sin of Brahmahatya. All his efforts of 
separating Brahma's skull from his left palm went in vain. In the meantime, an 
entity named Brahmahatya appeared before him and entered into his body. 
Lord Shankar decided to go to Badrikashrama to atone for his sins. After 
reaching there, he became worried when he did not find Lord Vishnu. He went 
to take a bath in river Yamuna but as soon as he entered the river, the water 
dried up. He experienced this strange phenomenon at the Saraswati River as 
well. He then made pilgrimages to numerous sacred and holy places but still 
did not become free from Brahmahatya. Dejected, he ultimately went to 
Kurukshetra where he found Sri Narayana and requested him to free him 
(Shankar) from the sins of Brahmahatya. 
Lord Vishnu advised him to go on a pilgrimage to Varanasi where he would be 
liberated from his sins. 
Following Vishnu's instructions, Lord Shankar went to Varanasi and visited all 
the sacred sites like Dashashwamedh temple, Lolarka temple and Keshav 
temple. While he was worshipping Keshav, he said- "Though I have become 
liberated from my sins, yet I fail to understand the reason why this skull still 
sticks in my hand." Keshav told him that his problems would be solved if he 
takes a bath in the lake, which was near the temple. Lord Shankar took a bath 

432 
 



in that lake and ultimately the skull fell on the ground. The place where the 
skull had fallen later on became famous as Kapalmochan. 
SATI GIVES UP HER LIFE  
Sage Pulastya says- "O Narada! This way, Lord Shiva became famous as Kapali. 
This was the reason why Daksha did not invite him. In the meantime, Jaya, 
sage Gautam's daughter went to see Sati at Mandar Mountain. Seeing her 
alone, Sati asked about her two sisters, Jayanti and Aparajita. Jaya revealed to 
her that both of them had gone to their maternal-grandfather's (Daksha) 
Yagya. Jaya also told her that all the deities had been invited to the Yagya. 
When Sati heard this, she was grieved and angry with her father. In a fit of 
rage, she gave up her life. Seeing her lifeless body, Jaya started wailing. Lord 
Shiva arrived there and upon hearing Jaya's wails, asked her why Sati was lying 
on the ground. Jaya then narrated the whole story. Lord Shankar became so 
infuriated that it resulted in the creation of numerous Ganas among whom 
Veerbhadra was the most prominent one. 
Lord Shiva accompanied by the Ganas went to the site where Daksha was 
performing the Yagya. 
A tremendous battle ensued between them and the deities and finally, the 
deities were overpowered and ran away from the site. Veerbhadra, finding 
the time opportune, entered the oblation site. When the deities saw him 
entering the oblation site, they returned and tried to prevent him from doing 
so. Again, an intense battle erupted between both the sides. The deities used 
all kinds of weapons but they could not control the onslaught of Veerbhadra 
and fled. 
Veerbhadra then went near the sacrificial fire. The sages were terrified and 
ran towards Lord Vishnu who attacked Veerbhadra with arrows but it did not 
hurt him at all. Vishnu then attacked him with other divine weapons. But still, 
Veerbhadra succeeded in neutralising those weapons. 
Vishnu was enraged and attacked him with his Sudarshan chakra that 
Veerbhadra swallowed. 

433 
 



This angered Lord Vishnu further. He lifted Veerbhadra and dashing him to the 
ground, pressed Veerbhadra's stomach as a result of which, the Sudarshan 
chakra came out from his mouth. But Lord Vishnu spared Veerbhadra's life. 
Veerbhadra then went to Lord Shiva and narrated his woeful tale of defeat. 
Lord Shiva instructed Veerbhadra to leave for a safer haven and himself went 
to the oblation site accompanied by Bhadrakali. The sages became scared on 
seeing his terrifying appearance. 
THE DESTRUCTION OF DAKSHA'S YAGYA  
Fearing Lord Shiva's wrath, Lord Vishnu went to HRishikesh and remained 
aloof for quite some time. Shiva's anger generated so much heat that it was 
enough to melt the eight Vasus. As a result, a river named Sita started flowing 
from there. After being attacked by Lord Shiva, the deities fled from the 
scene. 
Lord Shiva then opened his third eye and furiously looked at the flame burning 
in the Havankund. 
The next moment, the fire went off. Even Yagya was terrified and he took the 
aerial route in the guise of a deer. Lord Shiva chased him in the appearance of 
Kal (Lord of death) with a bow and arrow named Pashupat. 
In the end, Kal (epithet of Shiva) was successful in killing the deer, which was 
Yagya in reality. 
After his death, Yagya's body was established among the stars. After narrating 
the tale of destruction of Daksha's Yagya, sage Pulastya then goes on to tell 
Narada that the names of the zodiacs had been given just according to their 
appearances for e.g. Aries (Mesh) appeared like a ram. Similarly, Taurus 
(Vrishabh) appeared like an ox and so on. 
 
TALES OF DEMONS 
ANDHAK- THE DEMON KING  

434 
 



Sage Narada was curious to know how the demon King Andhak behaved with 
the deities. He asked Pulastya in this regard. Pulastya replied- "After ascending 
the throne, Andhak did a severe penance to please Lord Shiva and received a 
boon according to which he could neither be killed by the deities nor by any 
mortal. He also received another boon according to which even fire could not 
burn him. 
Andhak appointed Shukracharya as his chief priest. He defeated the deities 
and had gained control over the whole earth.  
Once, Andhak had gone to see the beautiful sight of Sumeru Mountain. Indra 
after making adequate arrangements for the security of his capital Amravati 
came forward to fight him with a huge army. A fierce battle was fought 
between both the armies. 
The whole atmosphere was covered in darkness due to the dust. It became 
difficult for the warriors of both the sides to distinguish between friend and an 
enemy. The whole battlefield was strewn with dead bodies and blood. 
Indra unleashed a volley of arrows towards Andhak. In reply, Andhak too 
retaliated by unleashing a volley of arrows towards Indra. In this duel, both of 
them got injured. Infuriated, Indra attacked him with his Vajra, which 
destroyed all of Andhak's weapons. Indra's Vajra then chased Andhak who 
jumped down from his chariot to save his life. Andhak defended himself by 
attacking it with his fist. As a result, it fell on the ground. Indra then attacked 
Andhak by unleashing a volley of arrows in his direction. Andhak dodged the 
assault and ran towards him menacingly. He attacked Airavat the elephant 
and mount of Indra with such force that it became paralysed. Seeing his 
elephant in such a pitiable condition, Indra picked up his Vajra and ran inside 
the fort to save himself. Andhak then single-handedly destroyed Indra's whole 
army. 
Yamaraj was fighting from the deities' side. He attacked Prahlada who was 
fighting from Andhak's side. It became impossible for Yamaraj to match 
Prahlada's valour and bravery. As a result, he was forced to flee from the 

435 
 



battlefield. Inspite of having mighty warriors like Varuna and Agni in their 
ranks, the deities could not match the valour of the demon's army, which 
comprised of valiant and brave fighters like Virochan, Maya and Shambar. 
Ultimately, the deities were defeated in this battle. The victorious demon King 
Andhak returned to Patal loka with his army. 
SUKESHI'S QUERIES  
Sukeshi was the son of demon King Vidyutkeshi. He was a great devotee of 
Lord Shiva. Being pleased by his devotion, Lord Shiva had blessed him with 
invincibility and gifted him a city, which was situated in the sky. Sukeshi was a 
virtuous and just king. 
Once, he had gone into the Magadh forest where he found numerous sages 
engrossed in meditation. After introducing himself to the sages, he expressed 
his desire to know about the path that led to benediction. He also wanted to 
know how a man could achieve respectability and contentment in his life. The 
sages told him that a man could achieve benediction only by following the 
path of Dharma. "A religious man achieves both respectability and 
contentment", said the sages. Sukeshi then asked them about the 
characteristics of Dharma. The sages revealed to him that the deities engage 
themselves in religious activities like Yagya, self-study, study of Vedas and 
worship of Lord Vishnu. So, all these activities are the Dharma of the deities. 
"The Dharma of the demons consists of negative qualities like jealousy etc. 
But they have profound knowledge in policy matters and have great devotion 
towards Shiva", said the sages. "The Siddha's Dharma is to engage himself in 
activities like practice of Yoga, study of Vedas, selfrealisation and devotion to 
both Lord Vishnu and Shiva", said the sages. In this way, the sages enlightened 
Sukeshi on the Dharma of different sections of divine entities. 
At last, Sukeshi requested the sages to tell something about the hell (Narak). 
The sages replied that altogether there were 21 hells. The name of the first 
hell is Raurav, which covers the area of 2000 Yojans. The second hell 
Maharaurav is twice the area of Raurav. Similarly, the names of the remaining 
hells are Tamistra, Andhatamistra, Kalchakra, Aprathisth, Ghatiyantra, 

436 
 



AsipatRavana, Taptakumbh, Kootshalmali, Karpatra, Swabhojan, Sandansh, 
Lohapind, Kalmasikta, Ksharnadi, Krimibhojan, Vaitarninadi, 
Shonitpayabhojan, Kshuragradhar, Nishitachakra and Sanshoshan. 
SINFUL DEEDS 
Sukeshi asked the sages about the sinful deeds, which leads to hell. The sages 
replied- "People who condemn Veda, deities, Brahmins etc. go to hell. Those 
who don't believe in religious texts like Purana etc. or those who cause 
obstacles in the accomplishment of Yagya or those who prevent a charitable 
man from giving donation also go to hell. 
People who torment others, who steal sandals etc. go to the hell named 
Kalmsikta. Disobedient children who don't obey their parents and elders go to 
the hell named Aprathisth. People who touch their elders with their feet go to 
Raurav Narak. A selfish person who nourishes himself during drought without 
caring about his relatives go to the hell named Swabhojan. A person who does 
not protect people who have taken his refuge goes to the hell named 
Yantrapeed. A man who misappropriates the deposited money of other 
people goes to Vrishchikashan Narak. The sinners who copulate on auspicious 
days or who have illicit relations with other women go to the hell named 
Shalmali. 
This way, the sages told Sukeshi about various types of sinful deeds, which led 
sinners to different hells. 
JAMBUDWEEP AND BHARATAVARSH  
Sukeshi expressed his desire to the sages to know about Jambudweep. The 
sages replied- "Jambudweep is a very large island. It is subdivided into nine 
parts. Ilavritvarsh is situated in its central part while Bhadrashvavarsh is 
situated towards its eastern side. Some prominent places situated around it 
are- Hiranyakvarsh towards north-east, Kinnarvarsh towards south-east, 
Bharatavarsh towards south, Harivarsh towards south-west, Ketumalvarsh 
towards west, Ramyakvarsh towards north-west and Kuruvarsh towards 
north. All these nine Varshas are full of natural beauty. The inhabitants of all 

437 
 



the eight Varshas except India are never troubled by old age or death. The 
inhabitants are also religious and virtuous by nature. They attain great 
accomplishment without making any real effort. 
Bharatavarsh has nine sub-islands. All these islands are surrounded by oceans 
on all sides and it is difficult to go from one island to another. These sub-
islands are Indradweep, Kaseruman, Tamravarna, Gabhastiman, Nagdweep, 
Karaha, Sinhal, Varun and Kumar. Kirat live towards east of Bharatavarsh while 
Yavan live towards the west. People living towards the south of Bharatavarsh 
are called Andhra and those living towards the north are called Turuyak. 
Bharatavarsh is mainly inhabited by people belonging to all the major four 
castes i.e. Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. The seven prominent 
mountains situated within Bharatavarsh are Mahendra, Malay, Sahya, Shukti, 
Manriksh, Vindhya and Pariyatra though there are many more mountains. 
The following rivers originate from Himalaya Mountain- Saraswati, Yamuna, 
Hiranvati, Sutlej, Chandrika, Neela, Vitasta, Airavati, Kuhu, Devika, Ushira, 
Dhataki, Rasa, Gomti, Gandki, Kaushiki, Sarayu etc. Similarly, many rivers 
originate from the other mountains. 
DASHANG DHARMA 
The sages say- "Dharma consists of ten properties such as non-violence, truth, 
charity, not stealing the property of others, forgiveness, self-restraint, 
cleanliness etc. Hence it is known as Dashang Dharma. These properties are 
obligatory for people belonging to all castes and creeds. 
A Brahmin's life is categorised into four ashramas- Brahmacharya, Grihastha, 
Vanprastha and Sanyas. A Brahmachari is supposed to acquire knowledge by 
living a celibate life. After completing his studies, the Brahmachari graduates 
to the life of a householder. He gets married and performs his duties towards 
his family. After this, he enters into Vanprastha ashrama where he is required 
to go to the forest after abandoning worldly pleasures. At last, he accepts 
Sanyas, which is total renunciation. He is supposed to pass the rest of his life 
doing meditation and penance."  

438 
 



THE RISE AND FALL OF SUKESHI'S KINGDOM  
Pulastya says- "After being enlightened by the sages on various subjects, 
Sukeshi returned to his capital. He taught the demons all that he had learnt. 
As a result, all the demons became very virtuous. The newly attained 
virtuosity and religiousness made the demons invincible and powerful. 
Sukeshi's capital was situated in the sky. The whole city illumined brightly due 
to virtuosity attained by the demons. Its illumination even subdued the 
radiance of Surya (Sun). 
Now it became very difficult to determine when the Sun rose. 
The deity Surya became worried at this development. He started pondering on 
how the demons became so powerful and contemplated over the means to 
destroy the demons. While Surya was meditating, the fact regarding the 
demons' power dawned on him. Surya became furious and angrily glanced at 
Sukeshi. The city started falling towards earth. Sukeshi became worried and 
started praying to Lord Shiva. Seeing his devotee, Sukeshi in trouble, Lord 
Shiva looked angrily at Surya as a result of which, he too started falling 
towards the earth. When the sages and hermits saw Surya falling down, they 
advised him to take refuge in Lord Vishnu. Surya curiously asked as to how 
could he take Vishnu's refuge as he had been punished by Lord Shiva. The 
sages then advised him to direct his descent to Varanasi. Surya accepted their 
advice and landed at Varanasi between two rivers- Varuna and Asi. He was 
feeling restless because of severe heat and so he decided to take a bath in the 
Asi River. After taking his bath, he started revolving around both the rivers. In 
the meantime, all the sages, demons, Apsaras went to Brahma loka and 
requested Lord Brahma to re-establish Surya in his original abode. Lord 
Brahma, accompanied by all the deities went to Lord Shiva and requested him 
to forgive Surya. Shiva was pleased at their humbleness and forgave Surya and 
re-established him on his chariot. He also gave a new name to Surya- Lolark. 
At last, Surya was re-established in the sky. 
 

439 
 



TALES OF NARA-NARAYANA 
MANIFESTATION OF NARA-NARAYANA  
Sage Pulastya says- "Dharma, the possessor of divine body and who 
manifested from the heart of Lord Brahma married Murti, the daughter of 
Daksha. Four sons were born to them- Hari, Krishna, Nara and Narayan. Hari 
and Krishna engaged themselves in the practice of Yoga while Nar and 
Narayan went to the Himalaya Mountain and started doing penance for the 
welfare of humans. 
Indra became frightened by their arduous penance. He feared that he might 
lose his authority and power. He sent beautiful Apsaras to disturb their 
penance. He himself went to that site accompanied by Kamadev and Vasant 
(spring). 
PRAHLADA MEETS NAR-NARAYAN  
Once Narayan saw all three of them coming and he treated all of them with 
respect. As he was aware of the reasons for their arrival, he decided to give 
them a surprise. He made the figure of a beautiful woman on his thigh with a 
flower. The next moment, the figure transformed into a live woman, which 
surprised all of them. 
For Kamadev, the beautiful woman resembled his wife Rati. He became so 
infatuated by her beauty that he forgot about the actual purpose of his visit. 
The same thing happened to Vasant and all the Apsaras. Everybody who had 
come with the desire of victory had actually become a victim. 
Seeing all of them surprised and amazed, Narayan told them that the beautiful 
woman was created by him from his thigh. He also instructed them to take 
away that beautiful woman to heaven. Kamadev and Vasant were captivated 
by Narayan's power. They also became terrified. 
They went back to heaven accompanied by Urvashi and narrated the whole 
story to Indra. Even Indra was amazed. In a short time, the amazing deeds of 
Narayan spread in all the directions and the various lokas. 

440 
 



Once, Prahlada- the son of demon King Hiranyakashipu asked sage Chyavan 
about the most revered and sacred place of pilgrimage in the whole world. 
Sage Chyavan told him about Naimisharanya- the most sacred place of 
pilgrimage on the earth. Prahlada visited Naimisharanya accompanied by 
many other demons. After reaching there, all of them took bath in a river. 
While roaming about in the city, Prahlada saw the trunk of a tree pierced with 
numerous arrows. Not far from the tree, he saw two hermits doing penance. 
Two divine bows and a pair of quiver were lying by the side. 
Prahlada was amazed as to why the hermits would require weapons. He 
revealed his thoughts to the hermits. Both the hermits replied that a person 
who works according to his capabilities, earns respect. Prahlada became angry 
at their reply. He asked them as to what were their capabilities. 
Actually, the hermits were none other than Nar and Narayan. Both of them 
told Prahlada that they were invincible and nobody could defeat them in 
battle. Prahlada's anger crossed all limits. 
A tremendous battle ensued between Prahlada and Nar-Narayan. 
PRAHLADA BLESSED BY NAR-NARAYAN  
A ferocious battle was fought between Prahlada and Nar-Narayan in which all 
types of lethal weapons were used. The battle continued for 1000 divine 
years. Ultimately, Prahlada was defeated in this battle. He went to Vaikunth 
and asked Lord Vishnu as to why Nar-Narayan was invincible. Lord Vishnu 
revealed to them that Narayan was his own incarnation. He also told them 
that Narayan could be won only by devotion and not by power. 
Prahlada decided to relinquish his throne and appointed Andhak as his 
successor. He went to Badrikashrama and made salutations to Narayan in 
reverence. Narayan was surprised at the sudden change in his behaviour. He 
asked Prahlada as to what the matter was. Prahlada then said- "Who can 
defeat you? You are none other than Lord Janardan. You are the one who has 
taken incarnation of HRishikesh, Chakrapani and Hayagreev." Narayan was 
pleased by his devotion. He told Narayan that though he was not able to 

441 
 



defeat him in the battle but he was successful in doing so by his devotion. 
Narayan also blessed Prahlada. 
Prahlada then returned to his capital. Andhak expressed his desire to make 
Prahlada the king once again but it was turned down by him. Prahlada spent 
the rest of his life preaching on the virtues of religiousness and truthfulness. 
MANIFESTATION OF VEGETATION FROM THE DEITIES  
Pulastya says- "Lotus flower manifested from Vishnu's navel in the month of 
Ashwin. Similarly, other vegetation also manifested from the different organs 
of the deities- Kadamb tree from the palm of Kamadev, Dhatura tree from the 
heart of Lord Shiva, Khair tree from the middle portion of Brahma's body, 
Kataiya tree from Vishwakarma's body. Kundalata manifested from Parvati's 
palm, Sinduar tree from Ganesha's belly, Palash tree and Gular tree from the 
right and left armpits of Yamaraj. Similarly, Sarpat manifested from the body 
of Sheshnag, black and white Durva grass from the tail and back of Vasuki Nag, 
Harichandan tree manifested from the heart of a devotee. 
MAHISHASURA  
During ancient times, there lived two demons- Rambh and Karambh who 
would torment people. 
As both were sonless, they decided to do severe penance by keeping their 
bodies submerged in Panchmad River with a desire of having sons. Indra 
becoming fearful, took the guise of a crocodile and killed Karambh while he 
was doing penance in the river. 
Rambh became so dejected by his brother's death that he decided to give up 
his life by severing his head and offering it in the sacrificial fire. As he was 
about to turn his thoughts into reality, Agni appeared before him and 
prevented him from doing so and said- "Killing oneself is a grave sin. Don't 
give up your life. I am willing to fulfil any of your wish." Rambh was pleased 
and requested Agni to bless him with a mighty and powerful son. Agni blessed 
him by saying- "You will beget a son from a woman of your own choice. But 
destiny had something else in store for him.  

442 
 



Once, Rambh had gone to see Yaksha King Malvat. He was impressed by 
Malvat's prosperity and unlimited wealth. King Malvat possessed lot of animal 
wealth like goats, lambs, oxen, elephant, horses, cows etc. Ramabh saw a 
beautiful buffalo in the cowshed. He started caressing her body just to 
appreciate her beauty. The buffalo got aroused and forced Rambh to copulate 
with her and this resulted in the buffalo's pregnancy. 
Rambh returned to Patal loka accompanied by the buffalo. But the other 
demons came to know about this unusual incident and as a result, Rambh was 
excommunicated from the demons' tribe. 
Both of them decided to return to Yaksha King Malvat's palace. In due course 
of time, the buffalo gave birth to a beautiful calf, which could change its 
appearance according to its wishes. 
Once, seeing the buffalo alone, a bull tried to breach her modesty. The buffalo 
ran towards Rambh for her safety. Ramabh attacked the bull with a sword and 
injured it. In retaliation, the bull also dashed its horns against Rambh's chest, 
which proved to be fatal. Seeing the dead Rambh, the buffalo became 
engulfed in sorrow. She had no other option but to take refuge of the Yakshas 
who protected her life. In the meantime, the seriously injured bull fell into a 
divine lake and died. Amazingly, its body transformed into a demon. 
The Yakshas decided to cremate Rambh's body. The buffalo too decided to 
embrace death by jumping into the burning pyre. But as soon as the pyre was 
lit, a ferocious demon emerged from it with a sword. He drove away all the 
Yakshas and killed the buffalo but spared her calf. This ferocious demon later 
on became famous as Raktabeej. He had defeated all the deities including 
Indra, Rudra, Surya and Marut. But the calf, which became famous as 
Mahishasura was even mightier than Raktabeej. All the defeated demons had 
accepted him as their leader and he was crowned as their king. Mahishasura 
defeated all the deities and drove them out from heaven. 
The defeated deities accompanied by Brahma went to Lord Vishnu and 
narrated their woes to him. Lord Shiva too was present there. Both of them 

443 
 



became furious after hearing the atrocities committed by Mahishasura. Divine 
effulgence appeared from the mouth of all the angry deities. These effulgence 
got collected at a place resulting in the manifestation of Goddess Katyayani. 
All the deities presented their weapons to her- Lord Shiva gave his trident, 
Lord Vishnu gave his chakra, Agni gave his Shakti etc. After acquiring all the 
weapons, Goddess Durga thundered loudly. The deities eulogised her after 
which she proceeded towards Vindhya Mountain mounted on her lion. 
Vindhya Mountain had been cursed by sage Agastya as a result of which, its 
enormous size turned into a hill. The tale behind this curse is as follows- In the 
ancient times, Vindhya Mountain was so high that it became very difficult for 
the Sun to make its movement. 
The Sun went to sage Agastya and requested him to minimise the size of 
Vindhya Mountain. 
Sage Agastya went near the Vindhya Mountain and said- "I am going on a 
pilgrimage but you are coming in my way. Since I am an old man, it is 
impossible for me to climb your steep slopes. 
I request you to reduce your size and remain in the same position till I return 
from my pilgrimage otherwise you will have to face my wrath." Vindhya 
Mountain accepted his request and turned into a hill. Sage Agastya then 
proceeded on his pilgrimage towards south but did not return according to his 
promise. He constructed a magnificent hermitage and asked Lopamudra, the 
daughter of Vidarbha King to stay there and himself returned to his 
hermitage. Vindhya Mountain remained in that position waiting for sage 
Agastya's arrival. This way, sage Agastya solved the problem of the Sun. 
Goddess Durga chose this very mountain to launch her assault. All the deities, 
Siddhas, Nagas, Apsaras etc. were present with her. 
THE DEMONS- CHAND AND MUND  
Once, the demon brothers, Chand and Mund were passing near the Vindhya 
Mountain when they saw Goddess Chandika there. Both these demons were 

444 
 



stunned by her divine beauty. They had never seen such a beautiful woman in 
their life. They went to Mahishasura and told him about her beauty. 
Mahishasura proceeded with a huge army, which comprised of valiant 
commanders like Vidalnetra, Vishang, Vayakal, Agrayudh, Chikshur, Raktabeej 
etc. The army assembled at the foothills of Vindhya Mountain. There, 
Mahishasura instructed Dundubhi to go and bring Goddess Durga by any 
means. 
Dundubhi went to Goddess Durga and boasted about Mahishasura's might 
and power by saying- "The mighty Mahishasura has defeated all the deities 
who ran out from heaven to save their lives. He is Lord of all the three worlds 
and is invincible but this victorious and mighty king has been enslaved by your 
beauty. You must not miss this chance of marrying him." Goddess Durga 
replied- "I am aware of Mahishasura's feats. I am most willing to marry him. 
But there is one problem. There is a tradition in our clan according to which an 
aspiring husband is required to give a Shulk (tax) in lieu of getting married." 
Dundubhi was happy thinking that it would not be difficult for Mahishasura to 
fulfil her demand. He said- "Mahishasura can even give up his life for your 
sake." Hearing this, Goddess Durga laughed loudly and said- "O demon! 
According to the tradition of our clan, only such a person can marry a woman 
who defeats her in the battle." Dundubhi went back to Mahishasura and 
narrated the whole story. Mahishasura instructed Chikshur to go and bring 
Goddess Durga after enslaving her. Chikshur proceeded with a huge army. 
Seeing him coming in the direction of Goddess Durga, Lord Brahma instructed 
her to use an armour to protect herself. The Goddess refused by saying- "No 
demon can stand before me in a battle." All the deities then chanted 
Vishnupanjar Stotra for her safety. Protected by the Stotra, she was successful 
in killing many demons. Seeing his devastated army, Mahishasura himself 
came to fight her. 
KILLING OF MAHISHASURA  
Narada asked sage Pulastya as to how Goddess Durga kill Mahishasura. Sage 
Pulastya replied- "After the killing of Chikshur, Mahishasura sent Namar to 

445 
 



fight Goddess Durga. Namar proceeded towards the Vindhya Mountain 
accompanied by a huge battalion. After reaching there, he shot a volley of 
arrows towards the Vindhya Mountain. As a result, the whole mountain was 
covered by innumerable arrows. This defiant act of Namar made Goddess 
Durga extremely furious. She attacked her enemies menacingly. She killed 
some of the demons by her sword, some with her mace and many more were 
killed by her arrows. Even her mount- Simha killed many demons. The demons 
were completely surprised by the ferociousness of the attack and fled from 
the battlefield. 
Seeing his whole army fleeing from the battlefield, Namar came forward, 
mounted on an elephant to fight Goddess Durga. He unleashed his 
devastating weapon- Shakti towards her. At the same time, he also attacked 
her mount Simha (lion) by releasing many arrows towards it. But Goddess 
Durga destroyed all the weapons. In the meantime, the elephant held the 
Simha with its trunk but the Goddess's mount somehow released itself from 
the trap and attacked Namar. Namar fell from the elephant and died. 
After Namar's death, Chikshur came to fight the Goddess but both his hands 
and legs were severed by her. Ultimately, Goddess Durga severed his head as 
a result of which, Chikshur died. 
The news of Chikshur's death spread like a wildfire. Many more valiant 
commanders of Mahishasura's army came forward to fight her but all of them 
were vanquished. 
At last, Mahishasura came forward to fight Goddess Durga in the guise of a 
buffalo. Goddess Durga started playing her damru (small drum) and Veena, 
which resulted into the emergence of numerous ghosts. He attacked the 
ghosts with his horns, four legs and by violently lashing his tail. He then 
attacked Durga's mount Simha and his violent movements shook even the 
earth and the mountain. Goddess Durga grabbed his neck with the help of a 
noose. The next moment, Mahishasura transformed his appearance into an 
elephant. Goddess Durga then severed his trunk. 

446 
 



Mahishasura again changed his guise into a buffalo. Goddess Durga attacked 
him by unleashing various weapons but the demon escaped unhurt. 
Goddess Durga suddenly jumped down from her mount Simha and climbed 
upon Mahishasura, who was in the guise of a buffalo. Mahishasura started 
jumping violently. Goddess Durga pressed Mahishasura's back with such force 
that he suffocated. She then severed his head. 
Suddenly, Mahishasura appeared in human form with a sword. Goddess Durga 
kicked him on his chest and again severed his head. The news of his death 
created havoc in his army and the demons fled from the battlefield and hid 
themselves in Patal loka. 
The deities became pleased at Mahishasura's death and eulogised Goddess 
Durga. She became pleased and after assuring the deities of taking re-
incarnation for their welfare, disappeared from the scene. 
RE-INCARNATION OF GODDESS DURGA  
Revealing the reasons for Goddess Durga's re-incarnation, sage Pulastya says- 
"Goddess Durga is also known as Kaushiki as she had manifested from the cell 
(Koshika) of Uma's (Parvati's) body. After the manifestation, she went to 
Vindhya Mountain with the objective of killing the demons Shumbh and 
Nishumbh. She was accompanied by numerous Bhoot ganas (spirits). After 
Sati's death, Rudra engaged himself in penance and became a celibate. He had 
even relinquished his responsibility of leading the deities' army. When 
Mahishasura came to know that the deities were bereft of their commander, 
he attacked them as a result of which, the deities were defeated. The deities 
went to Lord Vishnu who was at that time living at Shwetdweep. 
When they reached there, they were surprised to find that Lord Vishnu was 
aware of their defeat. 
Lord Vishnu then advised them by saying- "All of you must go to Mena- 
Manasputri of Agnishwat and request her to give consent to marry Himalaya. 
The same Mena would give birth to a beautiful girl who in reality would be the 
re-incarnation of Sati. All of you must go to Kurukshetra and eulogise her on 

447 
 



the night of Amavasya." The deities were curious to know about the origin of 
Kurukshetra. Lord Vishnu told them- "During the initial phase of Satya Yuga, 
there was a mighty king named Riksh, who was the descendant of Soma. 
Samvaran was the son of Riksh. He succeeded his father at a young age. 
Samvaran was a great devotee of mine. Vashishtha- the son of Varuna was his 
chief priest and had taught him all the Vedas. One day, Samvaran went to the 
forest for hunting after entrusting his responsibilities to Vashishtha. After 
reaching the forest, he started wandering in search of his game. He saw a 
beautiful lake full of numerous lotus flowers. He also saw many Apsaras and 
other divine beauties enjoying themselves by singing and dancing. Samvaran 
was infatuated by the divine beauty of one of those Apsaras- Tapti, who was 
the most beautiful among them. 
Coincidentally, Tapti too saw Samvaran staring at her. She was so infatuated 
by Samvaran's handsomeness that she fell unconscious. She was carried by 
her companions back home. 
After returning to his capital, Vashishtha was surprised to find change in 
Samvaran's behaviour. 
It seemed as if his mind was pre-occupied by something. By his Yogic power, 
Vashishtha came to know about the whole incident. He decided to take the 
help of Tapti's father- Surya. He went to Surya and requested him to marry 
Tapti with Samvaran. Surya did not want to annoy his esteemed guest, so he 
gave his consent. Vashishtha then returned to his hermitage accompanied by 
Tapti and ultimately Tapti and Samvaran got married. 
In course of time, Tapti gave birth to a son, who possessed all the signs of 
royalty. After growing up, he mastered all the four Vedas and other scriptures 
within a very short period. At the raw age of 24, he became a scholar. When 
he attained marriageable age, he was married to Saudaminithe daughter of 
Sudama. Later on, he was appointed as the successor by his father, Samvaran. 
After becoming the king, Kuru ruled his subjects in a just manner but very 
soon he got bored of his monotonous life. He knew that only those kings 

448 
 



became immortal who accomplished amazing feats. He decided to do 
something for which people would remember him. With the objective of 
making his name immortal, he went to the most sacred place called 
Samantpanchak and decided to cultivate the eight virtues - Tapa, Satya, 
Kshama, Daya, Shauch, Dan, Yuga and Brahmacharya on its barren land. He 
started ploughing a piece of land with a golden plough, which was pulled by 
Lord Shankar's bull and Yamaraj's buffalo named Paundrak. 
While he was busy ploughing the field, Indra approached him and asked 
suspiciously as to what he was trying to cultivate. When Kuru revealed his 
intentions, Indra made fun of him and went back. But Kuru was not worried 
and continued to cultivate the land. In a very short time, he had already 
cultivated the land measuring 7 kosas.  
One day, Lord Vishnu arrived and asked the same question, which Indra had 
asked. When Kuru revealed his intentions, Lord Vishnu was surprised and 
wondered as to from where he would get the seeds to grow these things. 
Kuru told him that all these eight virtues were present in his own body and it 
would not be a difficult task to cultivate these things. Lord Vishnu wanted to 
test his commitment and sincerity and said- "Give the seeds to me. I would 
sow the seeds while you should plough the field." Kuru outstretched his right 
hand but Lord Vishnu cut it into thousands of pieces with his chakra. 
All the pieces were distributed among the deities but Kuru was unfazed and 
again stretched his left hand towards Lord Vishnu. But his left hand too met 
the same fate. In this way, the most generous and benevolent King Kuru 
offered all his organs to Lord Vishnu. But all the organs were severed by Lord 
Vishnu. At last, Kuru offered his head as he had nothing else to offer. Lord 
Vishnu was pleased by his generosity and asked him to demand anything. 
Kuru replied- "All the area cultivated by me should become famous as a 
sacred pilgrimage. All the devotees who visit or die at this sacred pilgrimage 
must attain salvation. This place should be known by my name." This is how 
the most sacred place of pilgrimage- Kurukshetra came into existence. 
BALI- THE DEMON KING  

449 
 



Lomaharshan told the sages- "Bali was the descendant of Virochan and the 
son of Hiranyakashipu. After his father's death, he defeated the deities and 
drove them out from their abodes. Very soon, all the three worlds were under 
his control. He was a virtuous king and so were his subjects. During his reign, 
every corner in his kingdom would be abuzz with religious activities. As a 
result, the whole world became devoid of sin." One day, Goddess Lakshmi 
arrived and said- "O brave king of the demons! I am pleased by your valiance 
with which you fought and vanquished the deities. This is the reason why I 
have come on my own will to bless you." After saying this, Goddess Lakshmi 
merged with his body. This way, Bali acquired all the splendours of the world. 
The sages asked- "How were the deities able to defeat Bali and why did Lord 
Vishnu take the incarnation of Vamana?" Lomaharshan replied- "After being 
defeated by Bali, Indra went to Meru Mountain where his mother Aditi lived 
and narrated the woeful tale of the deities' defeat. 
Aditi took her husband's (Kashyapa's) advice in this regard. Kashyapa thought 
that only Lord Brahma could solve their problem. So, he went to Brahma loka 
accompanied by the deities. 
When they reached there, they found numerous Brahmins engaged in 
religious activities. Lord Brahma too was sitting among them. Sage Kashyapa 
and all the deities made salutations to Lord Brahma and stood silently. 
DEITIES DO PENANCE AND LORD NARAYAN BLESSES KASYAP 
Lord Brahma told the deities that he was aware of their plight. He was of the 
opinion that the mighty Bali could be defeated only by the Almighty himself 
and nobody else. Lord Brahma said- "You must go to a place called Amrit, 
which is situated towards the north of Ksheersagar. The Almighty God is 
engaged in an austere penance at that place. All of you must go there and try 
to please him by doing penance and after he is pleased, just request him to 
take his next incarnation as Aditi's son." Sage Kashyapa and all the deities 
agreed to follow Brahma's advice. All of them proceeded towards 
Shwetdweep. When they reached there, they were amazed to find the place 

450 
 



devoid of any creature. Its boundary seemed limitless and even the Sun's rays 
could not reach it. Sage Kashyapa initiated all the deities into the austerity 
named Kamad, fulfiller of all the desires. 
After that, all of them commenced their severe penance. 
Lord Narayan became pleased by Kashyapa's eulogies and austere penance. 
He appeared before the deities and asked them to demand anything they 
wished for. Kashyapa requested him to give Aditi, the privilege of becoming 
his mother. Lord Vishnu agreed to take birth as Aditi's son. 
The deities became pleased and all of them proceeded back towards 
Kashyapa's hermitage. 
When they reached Kurukshetra, the place where Kashyapa had his 
hermitage, they inspired Aditi to commence her penance to please Lord 
Vishnu. Aditi did a severe penance for 10,000 years. The place where she did 
her penance later on became famous as Aditivan. Lord Vishnu was extremely 
pleased by her devotion. 
Lomaharshan says- Lord Vishnu appeared and told her that he was most 
willing to fulfil her wish. Aditi requested him to make her son- Indra, the Lord 
of all the three worlds once again. 
Lord Vishnu assured her that he would take birth as her son and kill all the 
demons. 
Aditi had apprehensions as to how she could bear the weight of Almighty God 
in her womb. But Lord Vishnu assured her by saying- "Don't worry. I will give 
you the strength to do that. In course of time, Aditi became pregnant. But 
soon after her pregnancy, the earth shook violently because of the unbearable 
weight of the foetus. Wherever she went, that particular portion of earth 
tilted down because of the enormous weight. Her pregnancy had significantly 
eroded the radiance of the demons. 
BALI'S QUERIES TO PRAHLADA 

451 
 



Lomaharshan says- "When Bali saw the demons becoming devoid of radiance 
and power, he enquired about the reasons from his grandfather, Prahlada. He 
wondered whether it was a bad omen. Prahlada went into a deep trance and 
saw the whole earth shaking violently. He also saw high tides rising in the 
ocean. He was convinced that these signs went to prove the inevitable 
emergence of the deities' power. Prahlada then meditated upon Lord Vishnu 
and found him manifesting in Aditi's womb as a Vamana (dwarf). He also saw 
the whole universe existing in his body. Prahlada was surprised but the next 
moment he controlled himself and told Bali- "Now I know the reason why the 
demons have become devoid of their radiance and power. Lord Hari is about 
to take incarnation as the son of Aditi and this is the reason why all the 
demons have become powerless." Bali curiously asked Prahlada- "Who is this 
Hari, the tormentor of the demons? Why should we be scared of him as we 
have many valiant demons who could defeat him easily." Prahlada became 
furious at Bali's utterances and cursed him by saying- "How dare you say like 
this! I am ashamed that you have taken birth as my grandson. I curse you to 
lose your kingdom and fall from grace because you have criticised Lord 
Vishnu- the supreme saviour."  
MANIFESTATION OF LORD VAMANA  
Bali felt sorry for hurting Prahlada's feelings. He said- "Dear grandfather! My 
intelligence has been overshadowed by my arrogant attitude. You have done 
the right thing by cursing me. I am not scared of losing all my prosperity and 
splendour but your anger is unbearable for me." Now even Prahlada realised 
that he had committed a mistake by cursing his own son. He said- "Unable to 
control my anger, I cursed you but now nothing can be done and my words 
will definitely come true. But don't worry as my blessings would help you to 
become a supreme devotee of Hari and you would be protected by him." 
Lomaharshan says- "In course of time, Lord Vishnu took birth as Vamana. This 
incident of Vishnu's birth had liberated Aditi and all the deities from their 
sorrow. Lord Brahma appeared and performed Vamana's Jatkarm. He also 
eulogised Vamana and worshipped him. Lord Vishnu was pleased by his 

452 
 



eulogy and revealed to him that he took the incarnation of Vamana to make 
Indra, the Lord of all the three worlds." Lord Brahma was pleased and 
presented a black coloured deer skin to him. Similarly, sages like Marichi, 
Vashishtha, Brihaspati, Angira, etc. presented Palash Danda, kamandalu, 
sacred thread and silken clothes respectively. Lord Vamana then proceeded 
towards the place where King Bali was performing his oblation. Lord Vamana 
was in the appearance of a hermit. Though he was of diminutive size, yet each 
of his steps were enough to shake the earth. 
LORD VAMANA'S DEMANDS  
Lomaharshan says- "The shaking and trembling of earth surprised Bali and he 
enquired about this strange happening to Shukracharya. He was also surprised 
by the fact that Agni was not accepting the offerings. Shukracharya, after 
contemplating for a while on this matter, came to know about Vamana's 
incarnation. He informed Bali that Vamana was on his way to the oblation site 
and his each step was causing turbulence on the earth. 
Bali was pleased that he would get an opportunity to see the Almighty God 
whom the sages contemplate upon. He was proud of his good fortune that the 
Lord was paying him a visit. 
Shukracharya aware of the reason for Vamana's arrival warned Bali against 
making any promise to him. Bali replied- "How can I refuse if the Almighty God 
demands anything from me? I am willing to face any hardship to safeguard my 
benevolent image. I don't mind if the deities get benefited by my actions. Even 
if the Lord is coming with the intention of killing me, I am not scared as that is 
how I would attain salvation. Come what may, I am not going to abandon my 
charitable nature." As the conversation between Shukracharya and Bali 
continued, suddenly, Lord Vamana arrived at the site. Vamana's radiance 
subdued the power of all demons present there. Lord Vamana being 
impressed by the grandeur of Vamana's Yagya complimented him for 
organising such a magnificent Yagya. Bali eulogised and worshipped his 
esteemed guest. He requested Vamana to reveal the reason of his arrival and 
promised that his wishes would be fulfilled. Lord Vamana smiled and told him 

453 
 



that he needed a small piece of land measured by three steps for the 
performance of Yagya. Bali was surprised by this demand and requested him 
to ask for more land but Lord Vamana told him that he needed only that much 
land. 
Bali agreed and took a vow to donate a piece of land measured by three steps. 
Hardly had Bali taken his vow, when suddenly Lord Vamana expanded his size. 
His first step covered the whole earth. By his two successive steps, he covered 
the two worlds. This way, Bali was forced to donate all the three worlds 
according to his vow. Lord Vishnu then made Indra, the king of all the three 
worlds and sent Bali to the nether world named Sutal. He blessed Bali by 
saying- "You would enjoy a long life till the end of this present Kalpa. You 
would hold the post of Indra till the arrival of Savarni Manavantar. As long as 
you remain supportive of the Brahmins and the deities, you would enjoy all 
the pleasures of life. But if you go against their wishes then you would be 
fastened by Varuna's noose." RIVER SARASWATI The sages requested 
Lomaharshan to reveal about river Saraswati's origin, which flowed in 
Kurukshetra. Lomaharshan said- "Saraswati originates from Pakad tree (Indian 
fig tree). She enters Dwaitvan after passing through numerous mountains. 
While describing about her majesty, sage Markandeya felt that Saraswati was 
the source from, which everything originated- all the three worlds, three 
Vedas, Vidya (learning), heavenly bodies like Sun, Moon etc.  
Once, sage Markandeya eulogised Saraswati by saying- "O Saraswati! You 
manifest in the form of cryptic mantra- "OMKAR". You are the eternal form 
through which the Almighty God (Brahma) manifests himself in different 
appearances." Saraswati was pleased by his devotion and said- "O Brahmin! I 
am willing to go wherever you want to take me." According to Markandeya, 
river Saraswati was initially known as Brahmasar. 
Later on, she became famous as Ramhalad. Sage Markandeya requested 
Saraswati to flow in the territory of Kurukshetra where sage Kuru was doing 
his penance. This way, Saraswati diverted her course towards Kurukshetra. 
KURUKSHETRA  

454 
 



The sages requested Lomaharshan to describe about the geographical 
condition of Kurukshetra. 
Lomaharshan replied- "There are 7 different forest ranges in Kurukshetra. 
They are- "Kamyakvan, Aditivan, Vyasavan, Phalkivan, Suryavan, Madhuvan 
and Sheetvan. Nine rivers flow across Kurukshetra- Saraswati, Vaitarni, Ashga, 
Mandakini Ganga, Madhustrava, Vasu, Kaushiki, Kaggar and Hiranyavati. 
Kurukshetra is believed to be the most sacred place of pilgrimage. A pilgrim 
visiting Kurukshetra should begin his pilgrimage only after worshipping the 
Yaksha. He should then pay a visit to the famous Aditivan where Aditi had 
accomplished a severe penance to get a son. By doing this, he is blessed with 
sons possessing all the good qualities. After that, he should pay a visit to a 
place called Savan where Lord Hari dwells. A devotee who pays a visit to Lord 
Vimaleshwar becomes liberated from all his sins and goes to Rudraloka after 
his death. Some other places of pilgrimage situated in Kurukshetra and which 
are considered to be very sacred are Paritlav, Kaushiki, Dharani, Daksha's 
hermitage, Shalukini, Sarpeedadhi, the temples at the bank of Panchnad river, 
Varaha temple, Someshwar temple etc.”  
“A devotee should also pay a visit to Ramakunda where Parashurama had 
constructed five ponds and filled them up with the blood of the Kshatriyas, 
whom he had killed. He had pacified the soul of his ancestors by performing 
Tarpan with the blood of the dead Kshatriyas. The dead ancestors were 
pleased with him and blessed him in becoming free from the sins, which he 
had acquired because of killing Kshatriyas."  
SAGE MANKANAK EULOGISES SHIVA  
Sage Mankanak was the Manasputra of Kashyapa. He had seven sons, who 
were famously known as Marud Ganas. They are the one who hold all the 
movable and immovable objects of this world. 
Once, sage Mankanak injured his finger by the sharp edge of Kusha grass while 
he was trying to pluck them for his religious rites. But he was quite surprised 
when he found vegetative juice (Shak Rasa) oozing out from the wound 

455 
 



instead of blood. He thought that perhaps his blood had transformed into 
vegetative juice by the virtue of his penance. This abnormal event made him 
arrogant and he started dancing in joy as a result of which the whole world 
started to swerve. 
Lord Brahma became puzzled by this sudden development. He went to Lord 
Shiva and requested him to stop Mankanak from dancing so that the universe 
became steady. 
Lord Shiva went to sage Mankanak and said- "O supreme sage! Being a hermit, 
you are supposed to have control over your emotions. May I know the reason 
of your extreme joy, which makes you dance." Mankanak told him that his 
penance had given him great power due to which vegetative juice was oozing 
out from the wound instead of blood and this was the reason for his extreme 
joy and happiness. "That is why I am dancing", said Mankanak. But Lord Shiva 
was not amused and wanted to teach him a lesson. He hit the thumb with the 
nail of his finger as a result of which, ashes poured out from the wound. 
Mankanak was surprised by this. Being ashamed, he said- "I know, you are 
none other than Lord Shiva because nobody else can perform this amazing 
feat. I am your great devotee. You are the one on whom, deities like Brahma 
and Vishnu are dependent. I need your blessings so that the virtues of my 
penance remain intact." Lord Shiva blessed him and promised to dwell in his 
hermitage forever. 
SOME SACRED PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE AUSHANAS TIRTHA  
Describing about the greatness of Aushanas, the most sacred place of 
pilgrimage, Lomaharshan narrates the following tale- "During Treta Yuga, Lord 
Rama had killed many demons while he was in exile.  
Once, while he was living in Dandak forest, he had severed the head of a 
wicked demon with his Kshura arrow. The severed head of the demon was 
carried by the arrow for quite a distance and coincidentally it got stuck on the 
thigh of sage Rahodar. It became very difficult for him to perform his religious 

456 
 



duties. Bad smell emanating from the severed head was unbearable. Some 
sages advised him to pay a visit to Aushanas to become free from his problem. 
Rahodar went to Aushanas and as soon as he touched the holy water of the 
river, the severed head got detached and fell in the river. Delighted, he went 
back to his hermitage. From that day, Aushanas also came to be known as 
Kapalmochan. 
VASHISHTHAPAVAH TIRTHA  
The sages asked Lomaharshan about the origin of Vashishthapava Tirtha and 
about the reason why sage Vashishtha was carried along by the powerful 
current of Saraswati river. Lomaharshan said- "There was great rivalry 
between sage Vashishtha and sage Vishwamitra. In course of time, it turned 
into a bitter enemity. Vashishtha had his hermitage at a place called Sthanu 
Tirtha and Vishwamitra's hermitage was situated just towards the west of it. 
Vishwamitra was jealous of Vashishtha's accomplishment."  
Once, Vishwamitra asked river Saraswati to bring Vashishtha to his hermitage 
with the help of powerful currents so that he could kill him. River Saraswati 
became sad and refused to obey him, which made Vishwamitra angry. He 
again repeated his commands. Seeing no other option, she went to 
Vashishtha's hermitage and narrated the whole story to him. Vashishtha 
agreed to be carried away by her current. 
When Vishwamitra saw Vashishtha, he furiously started looking for some 
weapon to kill him. 
Saraswati became scared and carried Vashishtha to safety as she did not want 
to acquire the sin of collaborating in the killing of a Brahmin. Vishwamitra 
angrily cursed her- "May your water be mixed with blood and may the 
demons thrive on your banks." This way, Saraswati flowed with her water 
mixed with blood for one year. All the sages, deities, Gandharvas and Apsaras 
were worried at this happening. But, this was not the case with the demons, 
who lived happily at the bank of river Saraswati thriving on the blood mixed in 

457 
 



her water. They used to live happily- dancing and rejoicing, as if they had won 
the heaven from the deities. 
One day, some sages arrived at the bank of river Saraswati and became 
distressed after seeing her water mixed with blood. They asked her about the 
reason. She revealed the whole story and the misdeeds of Vishwamitra. The 
sages then requested river Aruna- the liberator of all sins to change her course 
and start flowing towards river Saraswati. As soon as river Aruna submerged 
into river Saraswati, she (Saraswati) regained her purity once again. 
KAMYAKVAN TIRTHA 
The sages asked Lomaharshan about the origin of Kamyakvan Tirtha. 
Lomaharshan replied- " 
Once upon a time, the sages of Naimisharanya came to Kurukshetra to take 
bath in river Saraswati. But, since they were large in number, the banks of 
river Saraswati could not accommodate all of them. In their helplessness, they 
created an imaginary place of pilgrimage named Yagyopavitik Tirtha and took 
an imaginary dip in it. But many of the remaining sages were unable to do 
even this." When Saraswati saw such a large gathering of Brahmins, desirous 
of having bath in her holy waters, she created a garden (Kunj) and started 
flowing towards west. This very garden later on developed into a dense forest 
and became famous as Kamyakvan. 
STHANU TIRTHA  
The sages then asked Lomaharshan about the origin of Sthanu Tirtha and the 
importance of Sthanu Vata. They also expressed their desire to know about 
the reservoir named Sanihitya and how Indra had filled it up with mud. Sage 
Lomaharshan replied- " 
Once, Sanatkumar upon being asked by Balkhilya and other sages the same 
question, narrated the following tale- During the period of final annihilation, 
when the whole earth was submerged in water, Lord Brahma manifested 
inside an egg. He slept there for thousands of yugas. When he woke up from 
his sleep, he found the world devoid of any inhabitants. Being under the 

458 
 



influence of Rajo Guna, he planned to commence his creation. At the same 
time, Lord Vishnu awakened from his sleep and broke that egg after seeing 
that the whole world had merged inside him. Subsequently, Lord Brahma 
began his creation starting from the word- 'OMKAR'. After that, the terms- 
Bhur, Bhuvah and Swah respectively came into existence. The brilliant 
effulgence radiating from the egg had dried up the water as a result of which, 
the remaining water had turned into the shape of an embryo. The reservoir- 
Sanihitya is situated at the same place where the egg had manifested itself. 
Meru Mountain is nothing but the outer shell of that egg and all the other 
mountains are its membrane. The oceans and the rivers are the fluid inside 
that egg. There is a great reservoir near the navel area of Lord Brahma. A big 
Banyan tree is situated just in the middle of that reservoir. 
This tree appears like a pillar (Sthanu). All the three major castes (Brahmin, 
Kshatriya and Vaishya) originated from that tree. Lord Brahma then created 
his Manasputras- Sanat, Sanandan etc. Subsequently, he created the 
SaptaRishis and the Balkhilyas. All the Balkhilyas did a severe penance for 
thousands of years without having a morsel of food. They had become very 
weak but still Lord Shiva was not pleased with them."  
Once, Lord Shiva and Uma were travelling by aerial route when suddenly Uma 
saw the weak Balkhilyas engaged in penance. She was saddened to see their 
frail bodies and requested Lord Shiva to end their miseries. Lord Shiva told her 
that the Balkhilyas had not attained a bit of virtuousness inspite of their 
severe penance. "They have still not become free from anger and desires", 
said Lord Shiva. But Uma was reluctant to believe his words. Lord Shiva then 
asked her to wait there and himself went to show their real worth to her to 
prove his point. 
Lord Shiva then shed his apparels and became naked. As a mendicant, he 
visited the hermitages of all the Balkhilyas. At that time the Balkhilyas were 
engaged in penance and hence only womenfolk were present at the 
hermitages. The womenfolk, infatuated by Lord Shiva, started running after 
him. When the Balkhilyas came to know about this, they uprooted his private 

459 
 



organ (Linga) and threw it on the ground. Hardly had the Linga fallen on the 
ground, the whole world got engulfed by the process of destruction. All the 
sages and learned saints became worried and went to seek Lord Brahma's 
help. Lord Brahma revealed to them that this destruction was due to Shiva's 
wrath. He also told them about the futility of their penance as they were still 
under the influence of anger and lust. "You cannot attain perfection until your 
flaws are removed", said Lord Brahma. 
SAGES TAKE LORD SHIVA'S REFUGE  
Ashamed, the sages requested Lord Brahma to tell them the way to pacify 
Lord Shiva. Lord Brahma assured them that they would be forgiven if they 
took Lord Shiva's refuge. Lord Brahma went to Kailash Parvat accompanied by 
all the sages. After reaching there, he eulogised Lord Shiva with deep 
devotion. The sages also worshipped Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva was satisfied by their eulogy and devotion. He instructed the sages 
to establish the severed Linga at Sanihitya Sarovar. "By doing this, you would 
have all your desires fulfilled. 
The Linga would become famous by the name of Sthanu- the whole world. A 
devotee who pays a visit to this sacred place of pilgrimage would become 
liberated from all his sins", said Lord Shiva. 
The sages returned to the place of Lord Shiva's fallen Linga. They tried their 
best to lift it but were unsuccessful in their attempt. They became worried 
and went to Lord Brahma for help. 
Lord Brahma told them- "Since Shiva's Linga had fallen on his own will, hence 
nobody except him can lift that Linga." All of them went back to Kailash Parvat 
but Lord Shiva was nowhere to be found. 
Lord Brahma went into a state of deep meditation and sighted Lord Shiva in 
the guise of an elephant. When Brahma and the deities proceeded on their 
way, they found a Goddess with a kamandalu in hand and offered them Amrit. 
After being refreshed, the sages asked whether she knew of Lord Shiva's 
whereabouts. She told them that Lord Shiva was presently living in the middle 

460 
 



of Sanihitya Sarovar. After reaching the reservoir, they found Lord Shiva in the 
guise of an elephant. They requested him to help them, establish his Linga at 
the desired place. Lord Shiva agreed. All of them then went to the site of Lord 
Shiva's fallen Linga. He lifted it with his trunk and established it towards the 
west of Sanihitya Sarovar. The sages were satisfied and expressed their 
gratitude to Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva, pleased by their eulogy and devotion, 
decided to make the Linga as his abode. 
GREATNESS OF STHANU TIRTHA  
THE GREATNESS OF SANIHITYA SAROVAR AND STHANU TIRTHA  
Sanatkumar says- Describing the greatness of Sanihitya Sarovar, Lord Shiva 
told the sages that a devotee cannot attain salvation unless he pays a visit to 
this sacred place of pilgrimage. There is no other Tirtha like this one. "I would 
be easily accessible to a devotee who worships me with total devotion." After 
saying this, Lord Shiva disappeared. 
In course of time, the heaven became crowded with human beings due to 
virtues attained by going on pilgrimages to Sthanu Tirtha. The deities became 
worried at this development and went to seek Lord Brahma's help. Indra said- 
"If things continue like this then the heaven will be dominated by mortals and 
we will have no option but to move out from there. Now, its your duty to 
protect us." Lord Brahma ordered Indra to fill up Sanihitya Sarovar with mud 
so that the Sthanu Linga gets concealed and devotees no longer visited that 
sacred place of pilgrimage. 
Sanihitya Sarovar was filled up with mud as Indra created a dust storm, which 
lasted for several days. But still Indra's objective remained unfulfilled as Lord 
Shiva lifted Sthanu Linga and Tirtha Vata (Banyan tree) in his hands. There 
were some sages present on the bank of Sanihitya Sarovar at the time of this 
incident. They smeared their bodies with that mud and due to this, all of them 
went to Brahma loka. 
OTHER PROMINENT LINGAS  

461 
 



Sanatkumar says- "The sacred places of pilgrimage named Shukra Tirtha and 
Soma Tirtha are situated towards north and south of Sthanu Vata respectively. 
Daksha Tirtha is situated towards its south and Skand Tirtha towards its west. 
The sacrosanct Sthanu Tirtha is situated just in between all these four places 
of pilgrimage. Near Sthanu Tirtha is a Shivalinga and Goddess Uma dwells 
there. There is a Maha Linga established by Takshak towards the north of 
Sthanu Vata while the Shivalinga constructed by Vishwakarma is established 
towards the east. 
By the side of that Banyan tree (Vata Tirtha) is situated- Bateshwar Linga, 
which was established by Lord Brahma. Some other prominent Lingas 
established in the vicinity of Sthanu Linga areGokarna Maha Linga established 
by Ravana, Kumareshwar, Hastipadeshwar Shiva, Siddheshwar Linga, 
Hibhavateshwar Linga etc. 
KING VENA, BIRTH OF PRITHU  
Sage Markandeya then goes on to describe about the splendours of Sthanu 
Tirtha- Surya was Manu's father. Vena was Manu's grandson. He was wicked 
and always criticised the Vedas. 
Being displeased by his irreligious son, Vena's father left for the forest to do 
penance where he attained salvation. 
In course of time, Vena's tyranny spread across the length and breadth of the 
earth. In a very short time, he became the Lord of whole earth. He had strictly 
warned his subjects against worshipping any other deity except him. Sages 
became furious by his irreligious stricture and tried to change his mind but 
their efforts went in vain. Ultimately, Vena was killed by the angry sages. After 
his death, the sages churned his left hand, which resulted in the manifestation 
of a dwarf. The sages considered him to be unfit to become a ruler and 
churned Vena's right hand for the second time. This time, a divine entity 
manifested, who had all the auspicious signs on his body. The deities crowned 
this divine entity as the king and named him Prithu. Prithu proved to be a just 
king and his subjects were satisfied by his rule. 

462 
 



One day, sage Narada arrived at Prithu's court. Wanting to grab the 
opportunity, he asked Narada how his father could be liberated from his sins. 
Narada told him that his father was presently living among the Mlechchas and 
was suffering from diseases like consumption and leprosy. "He would be cured 
of his diseases if he is taken to Sthanu Tirtha and made to take a dip in the 
holy Sanihitya Sarovar", said Narada. 
He went to the site and found his father living among the Mlechchas. After 
taking the Mlechchas' permission, he brought his father to Sthanu Tirtha. His 
effort of helping his father to take a bath was resisted by the deity- Vayu who 
said- "The waters of Sanihitya Sarovar would get polluted if such a lowly 
sinner took a bath in it. First of all, you must go on a pilgrimage and visit all 
the sacred places to make your father pure. Only then he will be entitled to 
take bath here". 
Prithu accompanied by his father went on a pilgrimage and visited all the 
sacred places. When both of them returned to Sthanu Tirtha, his father had 
become pure by this time. Vena took his bath and became liberated from his 
sins. He worshipped Lord Sthanu and eulogised him with total devotion. 
VENA ATTAINS HEAVEN  
Sanatkumar says- "Lord Shiva became pleased by his devotion and blessed 
Vena that he would manifest from his body as Andhak in his next birth. Due to 
the sins acquired by criticising the Vedas, he would be born in the family of 
the notorious demon Hiranyaksh." Lord Shiva then asked Vena to demand any 
boon. 
Vena requested Lord Shiva to bless his attendant who had transformed into a 
dog due to his sin acquired by eating divine food. Lord Shiva blessed the 
attendant as a result of which, he regained his original form. Right then, Prithu 
arrived there. After seeing him, Vena expressed his gratitude for his 
tremendous effort without which, he would not have been liberated from his 
sins. After blessing Prithu, Vena departed for heaven. 

463 
 



In his father's absence, Prithu continued to rule justly. He performed many 
religious activities and gave unlimited donations to the Brahmins. After ruling 
for a long period, he went to Kurukshetra where he did a severe penance and 
attained the supreme abode after his death. 
THE ORIGIN OF BRAHMESHWAR'S FOUR HEADS  
After creating all the movable and immovable living things, Lord Brahma 
created a beautiful lady. He was so infatuated by her beauty that he expressed 
his desire to procreate with her help. 
As a result of this grave sin committed by Lord Brahma, one of his four heads 
got detached and fell on the ground. He carried his severed head and went to 
Sanihitya Sarovar to atone for his sins. After reaching that site, he established 
a four-headed Shivalinga and worshipped it daily. 
Pleased by his devotion, Lord Shiva appeared before him. He blessed Lord 
Brahma and said-"You have become free from the sin due to the virtue 
attained by establishing a four-headed Shivalinga at this sacred place." After 
blessing him, Lord Shiva disappeared. 
After getting liberated from his sin, Lord Brahma worshipped the idol of four-
headed Mahadeva and established another Shivalinga in the middle of a 
nearby lake. He also created a reservoir, which is named after him- 
Brahmasar. He established two other Shivalingas- one towards the east of his 
hermitage and another at the bank of river Saraswati. A devotee who goes on 
a pilgrimage to these sacred places created by Lord Brahma becomes 
liberated from all his sins and attains salvation. 
PRITHUDAK TIRTHA  
Describing the majesty of Prithudak Tirtha, Mahadeva told the deities- "All of 
you must pay a visit to this sacrosanct place of pilgrimage situated near 
Sanihitya reservoir. The day on which Moon, Sun and Jupiter unitedly come 
under Mrigshira Nakshatra is called Akshay Tritiya. You must go to that sacred 
place and perform Shradha of your ancestors." All the deities led by Indra 
went to Kurukshetra where Prithudak was situated. Brihaspati was also 

464 
 



present with them. After taking their bath, the deities requested Brihaspati 
(Jupiter) to enter into the Mrigshira Nakshatra as directed by Mahadeva. 
Brihaspati agreed to do that and entered into the Mrigshira Nakshatra along 
with the Sun and the Moon on Akshay Tritiya. 
All the deities then worshipped their dead ancestors by offering Pind 
comprising of sesame seeds and honey. The ancestors were pleased and 
presented Mena to the deities. The deities in turn presented Mena to 
Himalaya. Himalaya was pleased to have Mena as his wife. In course of time, 
three daughters were born to them. 
BIRTH OF UMA AND HER MARRIAGE TO SHIVA MENA GIVES BIRTH TO UMA  
Mena gave birth to three daughters and a son. The eldest daughter- Ragini 
was red complexioned and had red eyes. Kutila was fair complexioned and 
had beautiful eyes like that of lotus petals. 
The youngest daughter- Kali was dark complexioned and had beautiful eyes 
like the petals of blue lotus. Mena also had a son named Sunam. 
When all three of them were of six years, they started to do penance. The 
deities saw these beautiful girls and were enchanted by their beauty. Aditya 
and the Vasu Ganas took Kutila to Brahma loka and asked Lord Brahma- "O 
lord! Will this girl give birth to a son capable of killing Mahishasura?" Lord 
Brahma told them that she was incapable of bearing the effulgence of Lord 
Shiva and hence she should be released. Kutila was dejected by Lord Brahma's 
rejection and challenged him that she would try every means so as to attain 
the capability of holding the effulgence of Lord Shiva. 
Lord Brahma became angry with her arrogant utterances and cursed her to 
become a river. In a very short period, the furious current of Kutila over-
flooded the whole Brahma loka but Lord Brahma managed to control her 
current. In this way, Kutila remained in Brahma loka in the form of a river. 
When the deities saw Ragini doing penance, they took her to Lord Brahma. 
Even she was cursed by Lord Brahma in the same manner as her sister had 

465 
 



been cursed. Due to Lord Brahma's curse, she became Sandhya (evening) and 
started for the auspicious yoga of Kritika. 
After losing her two daughters, Mena tried to dissuade Kali from doing 
penance. But Kali was not to listen. Reacting to her mother's advises, Kali 
pronounced 'U' 'Ma' and as a result she was named Uma by her mother. Uma 
commenced her severe penance to please Lord Shiva. When Lord Brahma 
came to know about this, he instructed the deities to bring her along to 
Brahma loka but the deities were unsuccessful in their attempt as Uma's 
radiance was unbearable for them. They returned to Brahma loka and 
narrated the whole story to Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma was convinced that 
Uma was worthy of being Shiva's consort. One day, Himalaya, Uma's father 
brought her back home. 
Once, Lord Shiva went to Himalaya Mountain to do penance. When Himalaya 
came to know of his arrival, he was extremely happy. He made all necessary 
arrangements for Lord Shiva. One day, while Lord Shiva was engrossed in 
meditation, Uma arrived there. Lord Shiva was pleased to know that Sati had 
re-incarnated as Uma. But his joy was momentary as he went back into deep 
meditation. Uma paid her obeisance by touching Shiva's feet. Lord Shiva 
wanting to test Uma's devotion went into hiding. 
Uma sought her father's permission to do penance with the objective of 
having Shiva as her husband. Himalaya agreed and gave his permission. She 
started her penance after creating an earthen idol of Lord Shiva. She 
worshipped that idol with total devotion. Lord Shiva became pleased with her 
devotion and appeared before her in the guise of a mendicant. On being 
enquired by Uma, Lord Shiva told her that he was on his pilgrimage to 
Prithudak. "I am used to all these austerities as I have been practising it since 
my childhood. But why are you torturing yourself in such a tender age?", 
asked Lord Shiva. 
Lomaprabha, Uma's companion was also present there. She told the 
mendicant about the objective with which Uma was doing her penance. "She 

466 
 



wants to have Lord Shiva as her husband", said Lomaprabha. Hearing this, the 
mendicant laughed loudly and made fun of Shiva. 
He tried to dissuade Uma from marrying Lord Shiva. Uma became extremely 
angry and asked the mendicant to keep mum. But when the mendicant 
continued with his abuses, she got up and tried to move away from the side. 
Lord Shiva became pleased by her total devotion and appeared in his real 
form. He assured Uma to go back home and said- "I will send the sages to your 
house with a marriage proposal. The idol which you have been worshipping 
with such deep devotion would become famous as Bhadreshwar. 
Uma returned home and Shiva proceeded on his way to Prithudak. 
LORD SHIVA SENDS MARRIAGE PROPOSAL 
After paying a visit to Prithudak Tirtha, Lord Shiva returned to his abode. At 
that time, he was living at Mandar Mountain. After Lord Shiva's 
contemplation, the SaptaRishis arrived. After the formal salutations, Lord 
Shiva told the sages that his wife- Sati has re-incarnated as Uma. "All of you 
must go to Himalaya and request him to marry his daughter to me", said Lord 
Shiva. The SaptaRishis abided by his instructions. 
All of them went to Himalaya with Shiva's proposal. When Uma came to know 
about this, she was quite pleased but did not reveal her emotions. Himalaya 
was in a dilemma. He did not know whether to refuse or accept the marriage 
proposal. The Meru Mountain advised him to go ahead with the marriage as it 
would not be proper to refuse the SaptaRishis. 
Mena, Himalaya's wife said- "O Lord of the mountain! The dead ancestors 
gave Uma to me on the condition that I would get her married with Shiva. The 
son born to her would kill the demons- Mahishasura and Tarakasura. At last 
Himalaya agreed. The SaptaRishis were pleased and chose an auspicious 
moment for the marriage ceremony. They said- "Shiva would marry your 
daughter on Maitra Muhurta- the third day from today when the Moon will 
enter the Uttar Phalguni Nakshatra." After saying this, the SaptaRishis 
returned to Mandar Mountain and gave the good news to Lord Shiva. Lord 

467 
 



Shiva became pleased and worshipped the SaptaRishis. The SaptaRishis then 
went to inform all the deities about Shiva's marriage. 
UMA MARRIES LORD SHIVA  
Lord Vishnu, Brahma, the deities and the Ganas were pleased to hear about 
Shiva's marriage. 
Lord Shiva went to his abode- Kailash Mountain to make preparations for the 
marriage ceremony. 
Lord Shiva's marriage procession proceeded towards Himalaya Mountain. His 
appearance was quite terrifying with a tiger skin around his waist and 
Gorochan Tilak on his forehead. He had a garland of skulls around his neck. 
Snakes were coiling all around his body. His mount- Vrishabh (ox) was walking 
in a majestic way. The marriage procession comprised of the deities, Yakshas, 
demons and his Ganas. Lord Vishnu had Goddess Lakshmi by his side and was 
mounted on Garuda (eagle) while Lord Brahma was mounted on Hans (swan). 
When the marriage procession reached its destination, Himalaya received his 
esteemed guests with great honor and guided them to his palace. The 
womenfolk envied Uma as they glanced at the handsome appearance of Lord 
Shiva. Uma was looking divinely beautiful in her white coloured silken apparel. 
At last, both the bride and the bridegroom entered the canopy where the 
marriage ceremony was supposed to be performed. 
Himalaya placing Uma's hand in Shiva's, requested him to accept her as his 
wife. Lord Shiva said- "O king of the mountains! Despite being homeless, I 
agree to accept your daughter as my wife." After that, both Shiva and Uma 
tied the nuptial knot and circumambulated the sacred fire for three times. 
Both of them made offerings to the sacred fire. As Uma touched Shiva's feet, 
Lord Brahma got a chance to have a glimpse of her beautiful face. He was so 
infatuated by her divine beauty that he ejaculated. Nobody except Lord Shiva 
was aware of this incident. Lord Brahma tried to conceal his ejaculated sperms 
(Veerya) under the soil. But Lord Shiva prohibited him from doing so and said- 
"Don't destroy this Virya. From it would manifest 80,000 Balkhilyas." Lord 

468 
 



Shiva's prophesies came true and in a very short time, 80,000 Balkhilyas 
appeared there. 
Lord Shiva then returned to Mandar Parvat accompanied by his consort, Uma. 
VISHWAKARMA CONSTRUCTS A PALACE  
After reaching Mandar Mountain, Lord Shiva instructed Vishwakarma to 
construct a home. Vishwakarma constructed a spacious home for Shiva, which 
was spread in the area of  64 Yojans. The home was decorated with Swastika 
symbols and its walls were made of gold. 
One day, Lord Shiva jokingly referred to Uma as Kali because of her dark 
complexion. But Uma did not take his comments lightly and told Shiva that 
she was going to the Himalayas to do her penance so that he did not dare to 
call her by that name again. Thus, Uma went to Himalaya Mountain and 
commenced her penance. Standing on one feet, she engaged herself in severe 
penance. One day, a lion arrived and seeing Uma standing on one feet, waited 
patiently for the moment when she would lose her balance and fall into its 
clutches. Uma continued with her penance for one hundred years by 
continuously chanting the sacred Brahma mantra. Pleased by her devotion, 
Lord Brahma appeared before her and asked what she wished for. Uma first of 
all requested him to bless the lion with immense power. She then requested 
him to bless her with a golden complexion. Lord Brahma blessed her and 
disappeared. She abandoned her dark complexioned skin from which 
manifested Kaushiki. Now, her complexion turned golden due to Lord 
Brahma's blessings. Indra appeared before her and sought her permission to 
take Kaushiki along with him. Uma gave her consent without any hesitation. 
Indra took Kaushiki to Vindhya Mountain and requested her to stay there. He 
said- "You would become famous as Vindhya Vasini and would be revered 
even by the deities." He presented a lion to her and went back to his abode. 
On the other hand, Uma returned to Mandar Mountain and lived happily. Lord 
Shiva became so deeply attached to her that he forgot about his duties and as 

469 
 



a result of which, the whole world became disturbed. The deities became 
scared by this development and went to seek Lord Brahma's advice. 
Lord Brahma went to Mandar Mountain accompanied by all the deities. They 
tried to enter Shiva's abode but Nandi- Shiva's mount did not let them in. 
Helpless, all of them waited eagerly for the time Shiva would come out. Agni 
seeing rows of swans coming out from Shiva's abode disguised himself as a 
swan and thus managed to get inside. He went near Lord Shiva and said- "O 
lord! The deities are anxiously waiting for you outside. How come, you are not 
aware of this?" Lord Shiva immediately got up and ran towards the deities. 
Indra and other deities were scared at the prospect of losing heaven to Lord 
Shiva's progeny. So, they requested Lord Shiva not to procreate any child from 
Uma. Lord Shiva agreed but asked them as to who was capable of holding his 
out-flowing sperms. Agni came forward and swallowed each drop of Shiva's 
sperm. Satisfied, the deities left. Lord Shiva went inside and told everything to 
Uma. She became furious and cursed the deities that they too would remain 
sonless just like her. One day before taking her bath, Uma applied Ubtan 
(mixture of sandalwood, turmeric etc.) on her body. She then peeled off the 
paste from her body and made an elephant-headed image from it. Malini, her 
companion assisted her in taking bath. Malini was smiling all the while as Uma 
was taking her bath. Uma became curious and wanted to know the reason of 
her strange smile. 
Malini told Uma about her firm belief that one day, she (Uma) would 
definitely become a mother. Uma told her that this was impossible as the 
deities had prohibited her husband, Shiva from procreating a child. But Malini 
continued to smile. After taking her bath, Uma went back home. 
After sometime, Lord Shiva arrived and took his bath at the same place. The 
elephant-headed image created by Uma was lying there. Suddenly it became 
alive and started making a hissing sound from his trunk. Lord Shiva delightfully 
took him to Uma and said- "Look at your son." Uma was surprised to see that 
elephant-headed image alive and affectionately embraced him. 

470 
 



Lord Shiva again said- "Your son will become famous as Vinayak and the whole 
world would worship him." Lord Shiva then entrusted the task of child's 
security to Ghatodar. 
Thus, both Lord Shiva and Uma lived happily. The same Uma later on took 
incarnation as Goddess Katyayani and killed the demons- Shumbh and 
Nishumbh. 
KILLING OF NISHUMBH AND SHUMBH  
Shumbh and Nishumbh were sons of Danu. They wanted to avenge 
Mahishasura's death and sent many demons like to bring Goddess Chandika 
after enslaving her. First of all, Sugreev was sent followed by Dhumralochan 
but both of them were killed by the Goddess. When Shumbh and Nishumbh 
heard of their death, they were infuriated. Nishumbh attacked the Goddess 
with a huge army. Shumbh attacked from the other side. In the fierce battle, 
Goddess Chandika broke Nishumbh's sword as well as his shield. Nishumbh 
then attacked Goddess Chandika with his weapon- Shakti. Goddess Chandika 
broke it with her Chakra. At last, she attacked him with her arrows at him and 
as a result, Nishumbh got injured and fell. 
When Shumbh saw Nishumbh, injured and unconscious, he ran towards 
Goddess Chandika to kill her. Goddess Chandika blew her conch and made a 
thunderous noise by pulling the bowstring. Shumbh released the dangerous 
weapon- Ugradipti in the direction of Goddess Chandika. But her weapon 
Maholkanamni destroyed it. Shumbh thundered loudly and attacked Goddess 
Chandika with a volley of arrows but none could cause any harm to her. 
Finally, Goddess Chandika attacked Shumbh with her trident. Shumbh fell 
down unconscious. After sometime, he regained his consciousness and 
attacked Goddess Chandika with his arrows. But she destroyed all the arrows. 
In the meantime, Nishumbh had regained his consciousness. He got up and 
attacked Goddess Chandika with his trident. In the end, Goddess Chandika 
killed Nishumbh by piercing her trident in his heart. As Nishumbh was dying, 
an another demon manifested from his body. Even he was killed by her. Her 
mount Simha devoured all the dead demons. 

471 
 



Shumbh became angry at the death of his brother Nishumbh. He furiously told 
the Goddess- "O wicked lady! Do not be proud of your strength borrowed 
from others." Goddess Chandika replied- "O wicked demon! I am the only 
power of this whole universe. I am the origin of cause and effect. Look! All the 
divinities are entering into my body. 
The next moment, all the divine entities, which had earlier manifested from 
the bodies of the deities united with the Goddess. Now, the Goddess was 
alone. A tremendous battle was fought between Goddess Chandika and 
Shumbh. Ambika attacked him with numerous divine weapons. 
But, Shumbh neutralised her attack with his own weapons. 
Shumbh covered the whole body of Goddess Chandika with his arrows. She 
broke his bow. After this, Shumbh attacked her with his weapon- Shakti, 
which was broken into pieces by her chakra. 
Now, Shumbh took out his sword and attacked her with it. She broke his 
shield and sword with her arrows. Shumbh then attacked her with his mace. 
Even his mace was broken into pieces. 
Shumbh had no more weapons left with him. He hit the Goddess on her 
breast with his clenched fist. She slapped him so hard on the face that he fell 
down. The next moment, he got up and manifested himself in the sky. Now, a 
tremendous duel was fought between them in the sky. 
In the end, she dashed him to the ground and pierced the trident in his heart. 
Shumbh was instantly killed. After the killing of Shumbh, Gandharvas, the 
deities and Apsaras were so pleased that they danced and rejoiced. The whole 
atmosphere echoed with the sound- "Shanti Shanti" (Let there be peace). 
After Goddess Chandika killed Shumbh, all the deities under the leadership of 
Indra and Agni started eulogising her- "O Goddess! Be pleased upon us! 
Protect the whole world, as you are the Goddess of this whole universe. You 
appear in the form of this earth- the base on which everything is situated. 
Your light illuminates all the living creatures. You are the only power through 
which creation, nurturing and annihilation takes place. You are the Brahmani, 

472 
 



Maheshwari and the Kaumari. We salute you because you have protected us 
from the terror of the demons. We need your protection from all the 
calamities of this world." Goddess Chandika was very pleased by their eulogy. 
She asked them for any wish. The deities said- "O Akhileshwari! We need your 
protection. Clear all the obstacles from our path. Eliminate our enemies." 
Goddess Chandika replied- "During Vaivasvat Manavantar, I will take 
incarnation from Yashoda's womb, the wife of Nand, to kill the demons 
Shumbh and Nishumbh. After that, I will kill the demon Vaiprachit in my most 
aggressive form. One hundred years later, I will manifest myself and would be 
known as Satakshi because of my hundred eyes. My next incarnation would be 
known as Shakambhari because I would nurture the whole world during the 
period of drought. 
I will kill the demon Durgam during that drought period. I will kill the demon 
Arun- the tormentor of all the three worlds by taking the form of a bee. Due 
to this, I will be known as Bhramari. I will take incarnations every time the 
demons torment the world. 
Goddess Chandika says- "I will clear all the obstacles from the path of such a 
man who worships me. If a devotee listens to the great tales of how I killed 
Mahishasura, Shumbh and Nishumbh, on the eighth, ninth and fourteenth 
days of any month then he would be liberated from poverty and all his sins. 
He would become free from fear. A devotee must listen to my divine tales 
during all the religious ceremonies like making sacrifice, worship and 
performing Yagya. By doing this, all his enemies will be eliminated. A man who 
remembers me when faced with dangerous situations remains protected by 
me." After blessing the deities, Goddess Chandika disappeared from their 
sight. All the demons, who had survived after the killings of Shumbh and 
Nishumbh, went to the nether world to save their lives. 
BIRTH OF KARTIKEYA  
Swallowing of Lord Shiva's sperm had subdued Agni's radiance. The deities 
advised him to take Lord Brahma's help. While he was on his way to Brahma 

473 
 



loka, he came across a river named Kutila and requested her to hold Shiva's 
sperm. She agreed and requested him to release it in her waters. 
In course of time, she became pregnant. The thought of giving birth to an 
illegitimate child tormented her, so she went to Lord Brahma to take his 
advice. Lord Brahma instructed her to abort her foetus at Udyachal Mountain, 
which was covered by the dense forest of reed. Lord Brahma felt that it was a 
very safe place for her and nobody will be aware of this incident. Kutila 
followed his instructions. 
Kutila aborted her foetus just according to Lord Brahma's instructions. The 
foetus remained there for 10,000 years after which a child was born, radiant 
like a rising Sun and eyes like the petals of lotus flower. The child being hungry 
started to cry. At that time, all the six Kritikas were passing through that 
forest. They were so mesmerised by the child's beauty that they started 
quarrelling among themselves as to who should first feed breast milk to the 
child. Seeing their quarrel, the child appeared with his six heads. This way, all 
the six Kritikas fed their breast milk to the child at a time. This is the reason 
why Kartikeya has six heads. 
After Agni came to know of Kartikeya's birth, he proceeded to bring him back 
home. But Kutila saw him on the way and enquired about his journey. When 
Agni revealed his intention, she started quarrelling with him for Kartikeya's 
custody. Meanwhile, Lord Vishnu arrived there and enquired regarding their 
quarrelling. Lord Vishnu after being told the reason advised them to take Lord 
Shiva's help as he was the best judge on such matters. 
Both Kutila and Agni went to Lord Shiva and tried to get his consent. Uma 
advised Lord Shiva by saying- "All of us must go to that place where the child is 
living and try to know as to whom he would like to have as his guardian." All of 
them went to that reed forest and found Kartikeya in the lap of one of the 
Kritikas. 
Kartikeya knew about their desires. Seeing them worried, he manifested in 
four different appearances of Kumar, Vishakh, Shakh and Mahasen. Kumar 

474 
 



went towards Lord Shiva while Vishakh went towards Uma. Similarly, Shakh 
went towards Kutila while Mahasen went towards Agni. Thus, everybody was 
satisfied. Lord Shiva then blessed the Kritikas by saying that Kartikeya would 
become famous deriving his name from them. All the deities arrived there and 
decided to make Kartikeya, the chief commander of their army. 
KARTIKEYA KILLS TARAKA AND MAHISHASURA  
After being appointed as the chief commander of the deities, Kartikeya sought 
his guardians' permission to kill the demons- Taraka and Mahishasura. All the 
deities including Lord Vishnu blessed Kartikeya and wished for his victory. Lord 
Vishnu eulogised Kartikeya and praised his valiance. 
Kartikeya then proceeded with a huge army comprising of Ganas and Kritikas. 
Kartikeya had taken an aerial route so that he could reach his enemies' 
territory as soon as possible. The Ganas disguised as birds, followed him. 
As they were about to reach their enemy's place, Kartikeya requested the 
Ganas to descend to the earth. The Ganas followed his instruction and 
descended to the earth making a thunderous noise. 
Some demons like Mahish, Taraka, Virochan, Jambh and Kujambh heard this 
noise and went to Andhak to inform him about it. 
As the demons were trying to find out the cause of the noise, a demon- 
Patalketu arrived there in an injured condition. The demons were surprised 
and asked how he got injured. Patalketu, narrating the incident said- "I had 
entered sage Galav's hermitage in the guise of a boar with the intention of 
killing him. Suddenly, an arrow pierced my body. I ran towards the seacoast to 
save my life where I found large number of people who were planning to kill 
Mahishasura and Taraka. I have come here to inform you about their plan. I 
am very scared and worried." Andhak assured them that there was nothing to 
worry about as both Mahishasura and Taraka were mighty and it was not an 
easy task for anybody to kill them. 
When Mahishasura and Taraka came to know about this, they immediately set 
out with a huge army towards the seacoast. An intense battle commenced in 

475 
 



which both the sides fought valiantly. The Ganas and the Matrikas launched a 
severe attack on the enemy with all the weapons they had at their disposal. 
But the demons remained unaffected and their assault was too much for the 
Ganas to bear. 
After defeating the Ganas, Mahishasura menacingly ran towards Kartikeya. 
Suchakraksh who was fighting from Kartikeya's side unleashed his chakra to 
stop Mahishasura. Mahishasura retaliated by attacking the chakra with his 
mace but his mace was cut into pieces by the chakra. 
After destroying the mace, Suchakraksh's chakra chased Mahishasura. When 
Banasura saw Mahishasura's life in danger, he came forward to help him. He 
attacked the chakra with his 500 hands and grabbed Suchakraksh with the 
remaining 500. Seeing Suchakraksh in danger, Makaraksh hit Banasura on his 
head with his mace. Seething in pain, Banasura immediately released 
Suchakraksh. 
Seeing his army defeated, Taraka came forward to fight with a sword. He 
fought valiantly and defeated the Ganas and the Matrikas in a very short time. 
The defeated Ganas took the refuge of Kartikeya. When Kartikeya saw Taraka 
chasing the Ganas, he killed him with his weaponShakti. 
Taraka's death scared Mahishasura and Banasura. To save his life, 
Mahishasura ran away towards Himalaya Mountain while Banasura hid 
himself in the ocean. Kartikeya chased Mahishasura as a result of which, he 
was forced to abandon Himalaya. Mahishasura now took refuge in a cave of 
the Kraunch Mountain. Seeing the demon being protected by his maternal 
cousin- Guh (cave), Kartikeya was in a dilemma. He knew that if he attacked 
Mahishasura inside the cave then his cousin- Guh might get hurt. He waited 
for Mahishasura to come out. Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu and Lord Mahesh 
appeared and advised Kartikeya to kill the demon. Indra too advised him the 
same. But Kartikeya did not pay heed and told them that he would kill 
Mahishasura only after he came out from the cave. 

476 
 



Furious, Indra told Kartikeya that a man did not become a sinner if he killed 
one person to safeguard his community's interest. Giving his own instance, he 
narrated as to how he had killed his own brother- Namuchi. But Kartikeya was 
not convinced and refused to act according to Indra's instruction. Very soon, 
their arguments turned into a major dispute when Indra boasted of his 
strength. Kartikeya challenged him for a duel. Indra proposed a plan according 
to which, whoever circumambulated the Kraunch Mountain first would be 
considered as the winner. 
When Kartikeya returned after circumambulating Kraunch Mountain, he 
found Indra sitting there. Furiously, he asked Indra why he was seated. Indra 
replied that he was the winner as he had already finished circumambulating 
the Kraunch. Both of them quarrelled but were not able to decide the winner. 
So, both of them went to Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu and Brahma to take their 
help. Lord Vishnu advised them that only Kraunch Mountain could decide the 
winner. Both of them went to Kraunch Mountain and requested him to tell as 
to who the winner was. Kraunch Mountain said- "Indra is the winner since he 
was the first to circumambulate me. Kartikeya became furious and attacked 
Kraunch Mountain with his Shakti as a result of which, the great mountain was 
fragmented into pieces. Mahishasura who was hiding in the cave of Kraunch 
Mountain was also crushed to death. 
Later on, Kartikeya felt very sorry for having killed his maternal cousin- Guh 
and after being advised by Lord Vishnu, he went to Prithudak Tirtha to atone 
for his sin. 
RITUDHWAJ INJURES PATALKETU  
King Ripujeet- a descendant of Raghu lived with his valiant and brave son 
named Ritudhwaj. Ritudhwaj being a virtuous prince thought it as his duty to 
protect all the sages and hermits. Under his protection, the sages performed 
their religious duties without any problem. 
During Ripujeet's reign, a great sage, Galav lived in his hermitage doing 
penance. A demon named Patalketu used to torment him. Although Galav was 

477 
 



capable of burning Patalketu to death yet he hesitated to do so for the fear of 
losing his virtuosity. One day, sage Galav was contemplating on the means to 
get rid of Patalketu's terror tactics but was unable to find any solution and let 
out a deep sigh in frustration. He was amazed to see a horse falling from the 
sky. 
As he was looking towards the sky, he heard a heavenly voice- "This horse can 
travel thousands of Yojans in a single day. Give this horse to Ritudhwaj who 
will solve your problems." As per the instructions of that heavenly voice, Galav 
presented that horse to Ritudhwaj and engaged himself in penance. This 
horse was sent by a Gandharva king named Vishwavasu with a special 
purpose. Vishwavasu had a beautiful daughter named Madalasa. Infatuated 
by her beauty, the demon- Patalketu had abducted her to Patal loka. He 
wanted to marry her but Madalasa rejected his advances. Vishwavasu knew 
that only Ritudhwaj was capable of killing Patalketu, so he presented that 
horse to sage Galav with the instruction that it should be given to Ritudhwaj. 
Ritudhwaj went to Patal loka on that horse and fought a fierce battle in which 
Patalketu was seriously injured. Ritudhwaj released Madalasa from Patalketu's 
captivity and married her. 
LORD SHIVA DOES PENANCE  
Lord Shiva was so deeply attached to Uma that for 1000 years, he was 
possessed by only her thoughts. He forgot about his duties and as a result, 
there was anarchy all over the world. His obsession with Uma had also 
decreased his radiance. He decided to do penance with the objective of 
regaining his radiance. 
When Uma came to know about his decision, she was unhappy but Lord Shiva 
consoled her by relating the significance of his decision. Before leaving, he 
entrusted the responsibility of her security to Nandi. He started wandering in 
search of a suitable place for doing penance. 
Sometimes, he did penance under the tree, sometimes on the mountain peaks 
and sometimes on the banks of a river. Initially, he used to eat only kand and 

478 
 



Moola but later on he stopped eating even that and lived only on air. This 
way, 900 years passed during which he travelled to all the three lokas. 
Ultimately, he even stopped breathing. He inserted a small wooden block in 
his mouth to stop the air from entering his body. This act of Shiva resulted in 
the tremendous generation of energy inside his body as a result of which that 
wooden block blasted off through his skull and fell on the Himalaya Mountain 
with such force that the wooden block levelled numerous peaks of Himalaya 
Mountain to the ground. The famous place of pilgrimage- Kedarnath is 
situated at this very place. 
After that, Lord Shiva did a severe penance by immersing his whole body in 
the waters of Saraswati river. He remained immersed in the water for one 
complete year and did not come out. 
All the seven worlds including the oceans and the mountains started shaking 
violently. The stars and the Nakshatras started falling down on the earth. 
Curious to know why this happened, the worried deities went to Lord Brahma. 
Even Lord Brahma could not satisfy their curiosity as he had no answer. All of 
them then went to Lord Vishnu but he too was not aware of the reason. 
All the deities including Lord Vishnu then went to Mandar Parvat to see Lord 
Shiva. But they were surprised to find out that neither Lord Shiva nor Uma 
were present there. Lord Vishnu was aware of Lord Shiva's penance in the 
Saraswati river. Due to the sin of causing Mridani's foetus to abort, the deities 
could not know the fact behind this strange event. 
The deities then performed the most austere Taptakrichcha Vrata to atone for 
their sin. Lord Vishnu then gave them a glimpse of Shivalinga, which 
manifested in his heart. All the deities again worshipped that Shivalinga and 
made offerings. Lord Vishnu then took them to Kurukshetra where Lord Shiva 
was doing his penance in the waters of Saraswati. The deities eulogised Lord 
Shiva by saying "STHANAVE NAMAH" and Indra requested him to stop doing 
his penance as the whole world was in turbulence. Lord Shiva accepted their 
request with a smile and discontinued with his penance. 

479 
 



Even after Lord Shiva had stopped doing his penance, the earth continued to 
shake violently. 
Surprised, he started wandering here and there to know the truth behind this 
turbulence. He found sage Shukracharya doing penance on the bank of river 
Oghavati with the objective of learning the most secret MritsanJivani Vidya. 
Lord Shiva blessed him and his desire was fulfilled but the earth still continued 
to shake violently. Lord Shiva then proceeded towards Saptasaraswat where 
he found sage Mankanak was dancing in joy and his steps were causing the 
earth to shake. 
Sage Mankanak had acquired tremendous virtues due to his severe penance 
and as a result instead of blood, vegetative juice secreted from his wound. He 
had become arrogant and thought that it happened only because of his 
penance. Lord Shiva then subdued his arrogance by causing wound on his 
finger from which ashes poured out. Sage Mankanak was ashamed of himself 
and stopped dancing, and the earth became calm once again. 
LORD VISHNU KILLS MURA  
Mura was the Aurasputra of sage Kashyapa and Danu. When he saw the 
demons being vanquished by the deities, he went to do penance with the 
objective of getting boons from Lord Brahma. When Lord Brahma appeared 
before him, he said- "O lord! Bless me with a boon, which enables me to kill 
anybody merely by the touch of my hand." Lord Brahma blessed him and said- 
"So be it." Getting this boon made Mura very arrogant. He challenged the 
deities, Yakshas and Kinnars to fight him but nobody accepted his challenge as 
they were scared of his power. He then entered Amravati- Indra's capital and 
challenged Indra for a duel. Indra became terrified and abandoned his abode- 
heaven. Now, Mura became the Lord of heaven and very soon, he invited the 
other demons to join him in heaven. 
Once, Mura challenged a king named Raghu who was proficient in rituals for a 
duel. At that time, Raghu was busy performing his Yagya. He admonished 
Mura by saying- "What is the great deal in fighting with the mortals? If you are 

480 
 



really that brave then you should defeat Yamaraj." The arrogant Mura then 
went to Yama loka and challenged Yama. Yama was aware of Lord Brahma's 
boon given to Mura. So, he went to take Lord Vishnu's help. Lord Vishnu 
advised him to send Mura to Vishnu loka by any means. 
Yama returned to his abode where he found Mura waiting for him. He said- "I 
am ready to accept your authority on the condition that you protect me from 
the wrath of my former master." Mura curiously asked Yama as to who his 
former master was. Yama then told him that his former master was none 
other than Lord Vishnu and he lived in Ksheersagar. Mura then went to 
Ksheersagar to fight Lord Vishnu. 
When Mura reached Ksheersagar, Lord Vishnu asked him the reason for his 
arrival. Mura confidently said that he had come to fight him. Lord Vishnu had 
worked out an excellent plan to kill Mura and the time had now arrived for its 
implementation. Lord Vishnu said- "If you have come to fight me then why are 
you trembling with fear and why is your heart beating so fast? I do not fight 
cowards." Furious at Lord Vishnu's words, Mura put his hand on his own chest 
to convince Lord Vishnu that his heartbeat was normal. The moment he put 
his hand on his chest, he fell down and finding the moment opportune, Lord 
Vishnu killed him with the chakra. 
DESCRIPTION OF HELLS  
Lord Brahma, on being enquired by Sanatkumar on the different hells said- 
"Those who have illicit relationship or are in the company of sinners go to the 
first hell. Felling of trees and stealing the fruits of others' tree lead to the 
second hell. People who kill creatures unworthy of killing and those who 
quarrel over property dispute go to third hell. Terrorising the living creatures 
and Deviating from one's own religion lead to the fourth hell. Behaving 
deceitfully with friends and taking false oath lead to the fifth hell. Keeping 
somebody in captivity and causing hurdles in the path of others would lead to 
the sixth hell. Stealing of royal property or copulating with the queen leads to 
the seventh hell. Greed and misuse of hard earned money lead to the eighth 
hell. Stealing of Brahmin's property and condemning others lead to the ninth 

481 
 



hell. People who lack courtesy or who steal sacred texts go to the tenth hell." 
Altogether, Lord Brahma described about 16 hells. 
KING DANDA AND ARAJA ANDHAKASURA- THE DEMON  
Narada asks sage Pulastya- "What did the demon Andhak do after entering 
Patal loka and how was Lord Shiva's life at Mandar Mountain?" Pulastya says- 
"Andhak was infatuated by Girija's divine beauty and his lust only became 
stronger as the days passed by. Although Prahlada tried very hard to convince 
him and narrated the tale of his birth, which happened only because of Lord 
Shiva's blessing.  
Once Lord Shiva was engrossed in meditation when Uma playfully shut all his 
three eyes and the whole atmosphere was covered in darkness. An entity 
manifested from that darkness who was presented to Hiranyaksh and who 
later on became famous as Andhak. 
Prahlada also told him that his lust for his own mother (Parvati) was licentious 
and most immoral." In order to dissuade Andhak from going ahead with his 
immoral intention, Prahlada narrated a story, which described the destruction 
of an immoral king named Danda. "Sage Shukracharya was the royal priest of 
King Danda, who performed all the religious rites. He had a daughter named 
Araja.  
Once Shukracharya had gone to meet the demon Vrishparva and stayed there 
for some days. King Danda went to Shukracharya's hermitage to find out the 
reasons for his absence. 
He saw Araja and became enchanted by her beauty. He expressed his desires 
to Araja that he wanted her at any cost. Araja tried to dissuade him by saying 
that his immoral action would amount to committing treachery towards his 
Guru- Shukracharya. She also tried to scare him by citing about her father's 
rage, which even the deities feared. King Danda then narrated this tale to 
force her to accept his proposal- "Vishwakarma had a beautiful daughter- 
Chitrangada.  

482 
 



Once, she had gone to take bath in the river with her companions. Suddenly, 
King Surath arrived there and being infatuated by her beauty became lovesick. 
Seeing his pitiable condition, Chitrangada offered herself to him despite her 
companions' objection." After narrating this story, King Danda asked Araja to 
follow the example of Chitrangada. But she said- "You have narrated only half 
the story. I will tell you what happened after that." She then told this story- 
"The immoral act of Chitrangada had angered her father and he cursed her 
that her married life would be unsuccessful. One day, King Surath was 
drowned by the powerful current of the Saraswati. Chitrangada fainted as she 
could not bear the sorrow of her husband's separation. After regaining her 
consciousness, she looked all around but could not find her husband.  
Once again, she became unconscious and fell in the Saraswati river. The 
powerful currents of Saraswati drowned her and she was ultimately thrown in 
Gomti river. Gomti's current abandoned her near a forest inhabited by 
ferocious lions." After narrating her story, Araja told King Danda that she 
would certainly not accept his proposal as she did not want to meet the same 
fate as that of Chitrangada. The king told her that the story was still 
incomplete and narrated the following tale- "When Chitrangada regained her 
consciousness, she found herself in a dense forest. Seeing her in a sorrowful 
mood, Anjan- a Guhyak consoled her by saying that very soon, she would re-
unite with her husband. He also advised her to go on a pilgrimage to Srikanth. 
Chitrangada went to Srikanth situated towards the south of river Kalindi. After 
taking a bath in Kalindi river, she visited the Srikanth temple and worshipped 
Lord Maheshwar. 
Meanwhile, a sage arrived there and seeing Chitrangada queried about her 
staying in a deserted place. Chitrangada narrated the whole story as to how 
she was cursed by her own father. The sage became extremely furious after 
hearing her woeful tale and cursed Vishwakarma to become a monkey. He 
also advised her to go to SaptaGodavar and engage in the worship of Lord 
Hatkeshwar where one day she would meet Devavati- the daughter of demon 
Kandarmali. 

483 
 



Chitrangada went to SaptaGodavar and engaged herself in the worship of Lord 
Hatkeshwar. The sage wrote the following lines on the walls of Srikanth 
temple- "Is there anybody who could liberate this beautiful girl from her 
sorrow?" After that, the sage proceeded on his pilgrimage to Pushkarnath. 
VISHWAKARMA BECOMES A MONKEY  
Continuing with his story, King Danda says- "Chitrangada stayed for a long 
period at SaptaGodavar. She used to spend time by engaging in the worship of 
Lord Hatkeshwar waiting for the day she would meet her husband. 
Vishwakarma had become a monkey due to the curse of that sage and started 
living at Shalveya Mountain. 
One day, a demon named Kandarmali arrived at the foothills of Shalveya 
Mountain accompanied by his daughter- Vedavati. The monkey 
(Vishwakarma) held Vedavati by her hand. Kandarmali became furious and 
took out his sword to kill the monkey. 
Sensing danger, the monkey ran away towards Himalaya Mountain carrying 
Vedavati in his lap. 
Kandarmali chased him. On the way, the monkey abandoned Vedavati at the 
door of a secluded hermitage and hid himself in the waters of river Kalindi but 
was drowned. Kandarmali had seen the monkey drowning and conjured that 
his daughter too might have drowned along with him. 
He returned to his abode in a remorseful mood. 
The ferocious current of Kalindi river carried that monkey to a famous place 
called Shivi. After regaining his consciousness, he returned to the place where 
he had left Vedavati. After reaching that spot, he found Anjan accompanied by 
his daughter- Nandayanti treading along. He mistook Nandayanti for Vedavati 
and ran towards her. Sensing danger, Nandayanti jumped into the Hiranvati 
River and was carried by its ferocious current to Kaushal. When she regained 
her consciousness, Nandayanti found herself near a large Banyan tree. Sitting 
on the rock in a thoughtful mood, she heard a heavenly voice- 'Is there 
anybody who could inform sage Ritdhwaj about his son's captivity and who 

484 
 



has been tied to this Banyan tree?' Nandayanti was surprised to find a 5 year 
old child being tied to the topmost branch of the Banyan tree. On being 
enquired, the child told her- "My name is Jabali. Sage Ritdhwaj is my father 
who has blessed me with 5000 years of childhood birth, 10,000 years of 
adolescence and 20 years of adulthood respectively. 
But he had also warned me of being held captive for the period of  500 years 
during my childhood. One day, I had gone to take bath in the Hiranvati River 
when suddenly, I came across a huge monkey who enslaved me. I am living 
here in captivity since then." After narrating his story, Jabali enquired about 
Nandayanti's identity. Nandayanti told everything, which had happened to 
her. Jabali advised her to go to Srikanth temple situated on the bank of river 
Yamuna and said- "There, you would meet my father Ritdhwaj who comes to 
the temple daily in the afternoon to worship Lord Shiva. You can seek his 
help." Nandayanti went to Ritdhwaj's hermitage as per the instruction of 
Jabali. One day while she was worshipping in the Srikanth temple, she saw 
those lines inscribed by the sage, who had once cursed her father- 
Vishwakarma. She added one more line to that inscription- "Sage Mudgal had 
prophesised that I would become a queen. Instead of becoming a queen, I am 
going through my most turbulent period. Is there anyone who could help me 
out?" After that, she went to the bank of river Yamuna where she found a 
beautiful hermitage. She entered inside the hermitage and found Vedavati 
sitting there. Very soon, both of them became fast friends. In the meantime, 
sage Ritdhwaj had gone to offer prayers in the Srikanth temple and saw those 
lines inscribed on its walls. He went into deep contemplation and understood 
what those lines meant. After worshipping, he left for Ayodhya where he met 
King Ikshvaku. He requested Ikshvaku to instruct his son- Shakuni to release 
Jabali from the monkey's captivity. 
Ikshvaku instructed his son to fulfil sage Ritdhwaj's desire. All three of them 
including Ikshvaku went to the site of Jabali's captivity. Shakuni being a master 
archer, cut all the creepers that had grown around Jabali. Sage Ritdhwaj 
climbed up the tree and found that Jabali was tied to the branch. He tried to 

485 
 



open the knot but was unsuccessful and called Shakuni for help. Shakuni tried 
hard to open the knot but even he was unsuccessful. He then cut that branch 
into three pieces by unleashing a volley of arrows. Thus Jabali became free 
albeit partially as he was burdened with the three pieces of that branch. 
SEARCH FOR CHITRANGADA AND VEDAVATI  
In the meantime, both daughters of Yaksha and the demon arrived at Srikanth 
Mahadeva temple and engaged themselves in the worship of Lord Mahadeva. 
One day, sage Galav arrived at the temple and was astonished to find two 
young ladies at such a deserted place. While taking bath, he heard the 
melodious songs of the two ladies. He became convinced of their divinity as it 
was impossible for mortals to sing with such expertise. 
After the worship, sage Galav asked them their identity who then narrated the 
whole story. The next morning, as Galav was about to leave, both of them 
requested him to take them along. All three of them then left for Pushkar 
Tirtha. After reaching their destination, sage Galav decided to take a dip in the 
holy river. While taking bath, he saw many female fish trying to coax their 
male counterparts into making love by saying-"If sage Galav is not afraid of 
being in the company of young women then what makes you so scared in 
copulating with us?" The male fish replied that he was afraid of getting 
ridiculed by the public. Sage Galav was so ashamed of his conduct that he did 
not come out of the river. 
Both ladies waited anxiously for sage Galav. Suddenly, Chitrangada arrived 
and was surprised to see strangers standing there. All three of them were 
looking at each other with surprised expressions on their face when Vedavati 
arrived there suddenly. She went near Chitrangada and enquired about her 
identity. Chitrangada narrated the whole story and revealed how 
circumstances had forced her to reach this place. In a very short time, all four 
of them became well acquainted with one another. They went to Hatkeshwar 
temple situated on the banks of SaptaGodavar River and worshipped Lord 
Hatkeshwar. They started living in the temple premises and spent their time in 
the daily worship of Lord Hatkeshwar. 

486 
 



On the other side, Shakuni, Jabali and Ritdhwaj were anxiously searching 
them. During the search, Jabali went to Shakal Janpad accompanied by his 
father- Ritdhwaj. At that time, Shakal Janpad was ruled by Indradyumna- the 
son of Manu. After meeting him, Ritdhwaj sought his help in finding his lost 
daughter- Nandayanti. Indradyumna told him- "O Brahmin! Even I have lost 
my daughter and don't know where she is at present. So, all three of us must 
go in search of our respective daughters." After saying this, all three of them 
decided to proceed ahead in search of their daughter. 
When they reached Badrikashrama, they were amazed to find a young man 
engaged in austere penance. After formal introduction, it dawned on 
Indradyumna that the young sage was his own nephew- Surath. Indradyumna 
requested his nephew to join him in searching his daughter. 
Ritdhwaj told Surath- "The girl for whom you are doing such austere penance 
had been taken by me to SaptaGodavar. Come with me and I will help you to 
re-unite with her." All of them then left for SaptaGodavar. 
In the meantime, as Ghritachi- Devavati's mother arrived at Udaygiri 
Mountain to where she came across a monkey and enquired if he had seen 
her daughter. The monkey told the frail looking Ghritachi that he had taken a 
young woman named Devavati to a hermitage near Srikanth temple. Ghritachi 
revealed to the monkey that the girl whom he was referring as Devavati was 
actually her daughter Vedavati. She requested the monkey to help her in 
locating her lost daughter. Ghritachi proceeded towards river Kaushiki in 
search of Vedavati followed by the monkey. After reaching there, Ghritachi 
took a holy dip in the waters of Kaushiki. In the meantime, Jabali and Ritdhwaj 
too had reached the banks of river Kaushiki. When Jabali saw that monkey, he 
told his father Ritdhwaj by pointing his finger towards that monkey- "This is 
the same monkey who had enslaved me and tied me up with creepers." 
Shakuni, the master archer became furious and sought Ritdhwaj's permission 
to kill that monkey. Ritdhwaj pacified him by saying- "Bondage is because of 
your past Karmas, so it is useless to kill this poor monkey." He then requested 
the monkey to free his son- Jabali from the weight of the three branches, 

487 
 



which were still tied to his body. The monkey opened the knots and Jabali was 
now absolutely free. Ritdhwaj was pleased and wanting to bless the monkey, 
said- "You can demand anything from me. I am willing to fulfil any of your 
wishes." The monkey replied by saying- "O great sage! Didn't you recognise 
this unfortunate monkey? I am Chitranagada's father whom you had cursed to 
become a monkey. Bless me that I become liberated from all my sins." 
Ritdhwaj blessed the monkey and said- "You would be liberated from all your 
sins, the day you procreate a child from Ghritachi. You would also regain your 
human body on that day." The monkey became pleased after receiving the 
blessings. 
In course of time, Ghritachi became aware of the monkey's real identity and 
developed physical intimacy with it. At first, both of them stayed at Kolahal 
Mountain but later on, they shifted to Vindhya Mountain. 
Meanwhile the group of five people- Ritdhwaj, Jabali, Shakuni, Indradyumna 
and Surath reached SaptaGodavar Tirtha. All of them got down from the 
chariot and took bath in the holy river. The thirsty horses quenched their 
thirst and satisfied their hunger by grazing on the green grass. After satisfying 
their hunger, the horses galloped towards Hatkeshwar temple. When 
Chitrangada, and her companions heard the galloping sound, they climbed on 
top of the temple and looked all around. Chitrangada saw Ritdhwaj and his 
companions taking bath and immediately recognised him. Her companion- 
Nandayanti too recognised Jabali. They were extremely pleased and climbed 
down from the rooftop of the temple. They worshipped and eulogised Lord 
Hatkeshwar to express their gratitude. 
After sometime, Ritdhwaj and his friends arrived at the temple to worship 
Lord Hatkeshwar. He recognised Chitrangada and was pleased to meet her. In 
the meantime, Ghritachi and the monkey also arrived there. Ghritachi was 
pleased to meet her daughter Vedavati and embraced her. 
Ritdhwaj instructed the monkey to summon Guhyak from the Anjan 
Mountain, Kandarmali from the Patal loka and the Gandharva King Parjanya 
from heaven respectively. 

488 
 



Guhyak, Kandarmali and Parjanya arrived at the Hatkeshwar temple and all 
three of them were pleased to meet their respective daughters. Chitrangada 
accusing herself for her father's turning into a monkey, tried to give up her 
life. But Ritdhwaj consoled her by saying that her father would regain his 
human body very soon. Ghritachi too approved his statement and said- "After 
ten months, I would give birth to a son and on that same day, your father 
would be liberated from sage Galav's curse and regain his human body." After 
ten months, Ghritachi gave birth to a son who later on became famous as 
Nala. 
Vishwakarma became liberated from the curse and regained his human body. 
Chitrangada was delighted to meet her father. A grand marriage ceremony 
was organised at SaptaGodavar, which was witnessed by the deities, the 
Gandharvas and the demons. In this marriage ceremony, sage Galav 
performed the rituals after which, Jabali was married to Kandamali's daughter, 
Indradyumna to Vedavati, Shakuni to the Yaksha's daughter and Surath was 
married to Chitrangada. After the marriage ceremony, everybody returned to 
their respective places. 
After completing this story, King Danda once again requested Araja to accept 
his proposal. But she was not convinced and said- "Say whatever you like but I 
will never surrender to your evil intentions." SAGE SHUKRACHARYA CURSES 
DANDA Prahlada says- "Blinded by lust, Danda forcibly breached the modesty 
of unrelenting Araja and returned to his palace. Araja was saddened by the 
inability to protect her chastity and started wailing. 
When Shukracharya returned to his hermitage, he found Araja lying down at 
the entrance. He asked her about what transpired with her. Araja narrated the 
whole story, which made Shukracharya extremely furious and his eyes were 
reddened due to his anger. He thundered- "The wicked Danda would become 
a pauper after losing his wealth and kingdom within a week." After cursing 
Danda, he instructed his daughter Araja to do penance so that she could 
become liberated from her sin and himself went to Patal loka accompanied by 
his disciples. 

489 
 



Shukracharya's curse came true and as a result, Danda lost his whole kingdom 
within a week. 
After narrating this story, Prahlada told Andhak- "On account of the immoral 
deeds of King Danda, the deities abandoned Dandakarnya and it was now 
inhabited by the demons. Now it must be clear to you that a person who 
breaches a chaste woman's modesty against her will is doomed to 
destruction. Andhak, you must not go ahead with your evil intention of 
marrying Parvati because she is Lord Shiva's consort whose might is 
unmatched." Andhak replied angrily- "I have driven out the deities from 
heaven. Why should I get scared of Shiva who is fascinated by his wife's 
beauty?" Prahlada tried his best to convince Andhak against going ahead with 
his evil plan but it had no effect on him. Andhak ordered his lieutenant 
Shambar to go to Mandar Mountain and inform Lord Shiva that Parvati should 
be given to him (Andhak) if he (Lord Shiva) wanted to remain alive. Shambar 
went to Mandar Mountain with narrated Andhak's desire to Lord Shiva. 
Hearing this, Goddess Parvati who was sitting besides Lord Shiva told Shambar 
that she would agree to marry Andhak on the condition that he defeats Lord 
Shiva in a battle. Shambar returned and narrated everything to Andhak. Now, 
Andhak's anger crossed all limits and he ordered Duryodhan to prepare for 
the war. Andhak's huge army was instructed to assemble. The whole 
atmosphere reverberated with the sound of bugles and war cries. Andhak 
proceeded towards Mandar Mountain with a huge army, which consisted of 
mighty warriors like Jambh, Kujambh, Shambar, Virochan, Duryodhan and 
Vrishparva. Destiny led Andhak towards his own death trap. 
LORD SHIVA PREPARES FOR THE BATTLEGANAS THRONG MANDAR 
MOUNTAIN  
Pulastya says- "When Lord Shiva became aware of Andhak's imminent attack, 
he requested Nandi to summon all the Ganas who were more than 700 crores 
in number. Some of the prominent Ganas like Pashupat, Kalmukh, Mahavrati, 
Digambar, Maini, Mahapashupat and Vrishabhdhwaj arrived at Mandar 
Mountain to help Lord Shiva at the request of Nandi. 

490 
 



On seeing the valiant Gana- Pashupat, Lord Shiva embraced him, which 
surprised all the other Ganas. They were amazed at the special honor given to 
him. Lord Shiva realised their astonishment and said- "Although all of you 
have great devotion towards me but in your ignorance, you have shown 
disrespect towards Lord Vishnu. All of you except Pashupat don't realise that 
both of us (Lord Shiva and Vishnu) are inseparable and there is no difference 
between us. Pashupat is aware of this and hence he has been accorded the 
highest honor." Having said this, Lord Shiva revealed his majestic form of 
Sadashiva to the Ganas. The Ganas were bewildered on seeing the whole 
universe existing within Sadashiva. Lord Sadashiva then transformed his 
appearance into that of Lord Vishnu. The Ganas also viewed the forms of 
deities like Indra, Surya and Lord Brahma etc. in him. They were now 
convinced that both Lord Shiva and Lord Vishnu were the same. The dawning 
of this realisation liberated them from their ignorance. Lord Shiva blessed the 
Ganas and embraced them. All the Ganas then took their position all around 
Mandar Mountain and readied themselves for the forthcoming attack. 
THE BATTLE COMMENCES  
Pulastya says- "When the Ganas saw Andhak's army approaching the Mandar 
Mountain, they made a loud roar, which reverberated through the land and 
sky. Hearing this roar, Lord Ganesha became apprehensive and went to 
Mandar Mountain to ask Lord Shiva about the origin of that tremendous roar. 
Lord Shiva told him- "I am going to fight a battle with Andhak." Lord Ganesha 
also expressed his willingness to accompany him. Lord Shiva then entrusted 
the job of Parvati's security to prominent Matrikas like Malini, Jaya, Vijaya, 
Aparajita and Jayanti. He then went to fight Andhak holding his weapon- 
trident in his hand and mounted on a bull. The Ganas made a protective ring 
and surrounded him from all sides. 
In a very short time, both armies confronted each other and a tremendous 
battle began in which the Ganas crushed many demons to death. The demons 
retaliated by attacking them with mace and swords. All the deities assembled 
in the sky to witness this battle. Mahapashupat attacked the demons with 

491 
 



such force that it caused great losses to the enemy. On seeing death and 
destruction caused in the demon's camp, Tuhunda- the mighty demon 
attacked the Ganas with his most destructive weapon- Paridhi, which scared 
the Ganas and they fled. Then Lord Ganesha came forward to fight Tuhunda. 
Tuhunda assaulted him with his weapon- Paridhi but it fragmented into 
hundreds of pieces after dashing against Ganesha's belly. On seeing the 
destruction of his maternal uncle's most destructive weapon, Rahu came 
running towards Lord Ganesha and held him tightly. Lord Ganesha, Ghatodar 
and Sukeshi assaulted him simultaneously with their respective weapons. 
Writhing in pain, Rahu immediately released Ganesha. Seeing the time 
opportune, Lord Ganesha severed Tuhunda's head with his axe. After killing 
Tuhunda, Lord Ganesha attacked the demons but the attack was repulsed by 
the mighty Bali. In this battle, the Ganas were finally able to annihilate the 
demons. Shambar protected himself by taking Shukracharya's refuge and all 
the surviving demons including Andhak followed suit. 
SHUKRACHARYA USES SANJIVANI VIDYA  
Andhak went to Shukracharya and narrated the woeful tale of demons' 
defeat. He also requested Shukracharya to help the demons win the battle. 
Shukracharya was dejected but he assured the demons that he would make 
alive, all the dead demons with the help of SanJivani Vidya and really all the 
mighty demons like Jambh, Kujambh etc. became alive once again. 
When Nandi came to know about this unbelievable incident, he went to Lord 
Shiva and informed him. Lord Shiva instructed him to bring Shukracharya by 
any means. "I shall control him by my Yogic power", said Lord Shiva. Nandi 
infiltrated into the demon's army but Hayakandhar spotted him and tried to 
resist his forward march. Nandi attacked Hayakandhar with his Vajra as a 
result of which, he fell down unconscious. After this, Kujambh, Jambh and 
some other demons ran menacingly towards Nandi. They surrounded him 
from all sides and started assaulting him ruthlessly. On seeing Nandi in danger, 
Lord Brahma became very worried and instructed the deities to help him. 

492 
 



Indra and all the other deities joined Lord Shiva's army and fought bravely 
against the demons. 
The sudden entry of the deities in the battlefield had distracted the attention 
of the demons and as a result, Nandi got an opportunity to penetrate through 
the rank and files of demons army. 
Ultimately, he successfully accomplished his mission and brought 
Shukracharya to Lord Shiva after abducting him. Lord Shiva wasted no time 
and swallowed Shukracharya immediately. The next moment, Shukracharya 
found himself in Lord Shiva's stomach. Shukracharya made frantic efforts to 
come out of the stomach but was unsuccessful. Being helpless, he started 
eulogising Lord Shiva. After becoming pleased by Shukracharya's extreme 
devotion, Lord Shiva expressed his desire to bless him with a boon. 
Shukracharya requested Lord Shiva to give him a way so that he can come out 
from his stomach. Lord Shiva agreed and asked him to come out immediately. 
Shukracharya started searching for an exit point but was amazed by the 
vastness of Shiva's stomach in which he saw the existence of the whole 
universe. He made ceaseless effort for one divine year but was unsuccessful in 
his attempts to come out from Shiva's stomach. At last, he surrendered to the 
will of Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva told Shukracharya- "By entering into my stomach, you have 
become my son. Now, if you want to become free then you should come out 
through the pore of my Linga." After saying this, Lord Shiva liberated 
Shukracharya through his Linga who after being released made salutations to 
him and joined the demons' army once again. The demons were extremely 
pleased at his arrival.  
Once again, a fierce battle took place, which continued for eight divine years. 
When the demons realised about the deities' supremacy in the battle, they 
started employing illusionary tactics and swallowed all the Ganas and the 
deities. The scene of the battlefield, Mandar Mountain became devoid of 
Ganas and the deities, which made Lord Shiva extremely furious. His extreme 

493 
 



anger resulted into the manifestation of Jrimbhayika- a ferocious entity. The 
mere touch of Jrimbhayika made the demons to yawn. All the deities and the 
Ganas came out from the opened mouths of the demons.  
Once again, the battle commenced, which continued for 700 years. 
When Andhak realised that Lord Shiva was invincible then he decided to 
acquire Parvati by deceitful means. He sought the help of one of his most 
trusted commander, Sunda by saying- "O brave Sunda! You are like my 
brother. I need your help. The battle has continued for such a long period but 
has still remained indecisive. I have decided to approach Parvati in the guise of 
her husband- Shiva and I want you to disguise yourself as Nandi." Sunda 
agreed to disguise himself in the form of Nandi to help his master. 
Andhak went to Mandar Mountain in the guise of Lord Shiva mounted on 
Sunda's back who had disguised himself as Nandi. When Parvati saw the injury 
marks on Shiva's (Andhak's) body, she told her companions- "Look, how 
grievously the demons have injured my husband! Please bring the medicinal 
herbs quickly so that I can dress his wounds." Her companions rushed to bring 
the medicinal herbs and in the meantime, Parvati started observing the 
wounds of Shiva (Andhak) minutely. She was surprised to see the absence of 
both the shoulders on his body. She immediately realised that somebody else 
had come in the guise of her husband, Shiva. Sensing danger, she ran away to 
protect herself. Her companions ran behind her and Andhak chased all of 
them. Parvati and her companions hid behind bushes. Being unable to locate 
Parvati, Andhak returned to the battlefield and the battle continued. 
The deities were fighting valiantly. Lord Vishnu created havoc among the 
enemy ranks and Lord Brahma sprinkled holy water from his kamandalu, 
which had increased the strength and power of the deities. Indra attacked the 
demon- Bala on his head with his Vajra but it was broken into pieces. On 
seeing the destruction of his weapon, Indra became scared and wanted to flee 
from the battlefield. Jambh, the demon made fun of him and challenged him 
for a duel. Indra then requested Lord Vishnu to provide him with a weapon so 

494 
 



that he could fight Jambh but Lord Vishnu sent him to Agni. Agni made a 
replica of his weapon- Shakti and gave it to Indra. 
Holding his new weapon, Indra then proceeded on his way to fight Jambh 
mounted on his elephant- Airavat. Jambh assaulted Airavat with such force 
that Indra started falling down towards the ground. 
When the Siddhas and Charanas saw Indra falling down, they provided a 
magnificent chariot to him so that he could fight with the demons. Meanwhile 
Indra dashed against the ground with a great thud as a result of which, the 
earth shook violently. 
Sage Shamik's wife thought that the earth was shaking violently due to the 
impact of earthquake. 
She requested her husband to carry their son outside the hermitage so that he 
remains unharmed and said- "The astrologers say that whatever is kept 
outside home during an earthquake becomes stable." Sage Shamik was very 
surprised but still followed her instructions. After the shaking of the earth had 
subsided, Shamik's wife requested him to bring back the child. Sage Shamik 
went outside and was surprised to find two children instead of one. He came 
back carrying both the children in his lap and asked his wife as to what made 
the second child to manifest. She told him that the second child will become 
the charioteer of Indra and assist him in the battle. This second child was none 
other than Matali who acted as the charioteer of Indra during the battle. Now, 
Indra had both the chariot and the charioteer in his possession. He went to 
the battlefield mounted on his new chariot. On the way, he saw a 
multicoloured bow and arrows lying on the ground. He picked up the weapons 
and fought valiantly with the demons. He killed many mighty demon warriors. 
Jambh and Kujambh ran menacingly towards him but Lord Vishnu severed the 
head of Kujambh with his Sudarshan chakra. Jambh assaulted Indra with his 
mace but Indra retaliated by attacking with his Shakti as a result of which 
Jambh was killed. The rest of the demons fled from the battlefield. 
LORD SHIVA KILLS ANDHAK  

495 
 



In spite of death and destruction caused to his army, Andhak still wanted to 
continue fighting against Lord Shiva's army. He even dismissed the advises of 
Shukracharya who wanted a momentary retreat and rebuffed him by saying- 
"All the deities including Maheshwar and Indra cannot save themselves from 
my wrath. Very soon, I am going to vanquish them." He then instructed his 
charioteer to move the chariot towards enemy's position. He shot a volley of 
arrows, which entirely covered the deities. Lord Vishnu advised the deities to 
kill Andhak along with his charioteer and destroy the chariot so that Lord 
Shiva could kill Andhak without any difficulty. 
All the deities then attacked the demons with renewed vigour. Lord Vishnu 
killed thousands of enemy's horses with his mace. Skand killed the charioteer 
and Vinayak accompanied by the Ganas destroyed Andhak's chariot. After 
being bereft of his chariot, Andhak attacked the deities with his mace. Seeing 
the deities in danger, Lord Shiva concealed them within his body and 
challenged Andhak for a duel. Andhak tried to attack Lord Shiva who was 
mounted on Nandi. 
Lord Shiva immediately jumped down from Nandi's back and attacked Andhak 
with his trident, which pierced his chest. Even after being seriously injured, 
Andhak did not die instead he pulled Lord Shiva for one mile holding him 
tightly in his clutch. Lord Shiva tried to resist by attacking for the second time. 
But Andhak retaliated by hitting Shiva with his mace causing serious injury on 
his head. A stream of blood oozed out from the wound, which poured down 
towards all the four directions. The blood stream which poured down towards 
east resulted into the manifestation of Bhairav named Kalraj. Similarly, 
Kamaraj, Chakramala, Somaraj, Swachcharaj, Lalitraj and Vighnaraj manifested 
from the other three directions. 
Lord Shiva then lifted Andhak above his head with the help of his trident, 
which was still pierced in Andhak's chest. His body had become red due to the 
blood oozing out from Andhak's wound. 
Lord Shiva had toiled hard to kill Andhak and as a result, he was perspiring 
profusely. The sweat drops originating from Shiva's forehead resulted into the 

496 
 



manifestation of a divine girl while the sweat drops that fell on the ground 
from Shiva's face resulted into the manifestation of a divine boy. Both the 
children started gulping down the blood emanating from Andhak's wound. 
Lord Shiva named the girl child as Charchika while the boy child was named 
Mangal and blessed both of them. Lord Shiva held Andhak above his head for 
1000 divine years, which reduced his body to a skeleton. 
At last, Andhak realised his mistake and begged for forgiveness. He eulogised 
Lord Shiva and hailed his greatness. Lord Shiva told him that he would forgive 
him only when he accepts Parvati as his mother. Andhak agreed not only to 
accept Parvati as his mother but also Shiva as his father. Shiva became pleased 
and lowered down his trident. He healed Andhak's wound by his divine touch. 
The deities became pleased at Andhak's change of heart and blessed him. 
Lord Shiva then took Andhak to Mandar Mountain. 
Parvati was still hiding behind the bushes. When she saw Lord Shiva 
approaching, she recognised him and called her companions to come out from 
their hiding. Lord Shiva gleefully told Parvati that Andhak had now become 
her slave. "Look at him. He is making salutations to you. Accept him as your 
son. Andhak then eulogised Parvati with complete devotion. Parvati became 
pleased and expressed her desire to bless him with a boon. Andhak said- "I 
don't want anything. I just want to become liberated from all my sins and 
remain in the proximity of Lord Shiva." Parvati blessed him and made him the 
Gana of Shiva who became famous as Bhringi. 
THE ORIGIN OF MARUT GANAS  
Narada asked Pulastya about the battle which Indra fought with the demon at 
Malay Mountain. 
Pulastya replied- "Andhak's followers- Maya and Tar tried to enter Patal loka 
after being defeated by the deities. While they were passing close to the 
Malay Mountain, they decided to live there being enchanted by its natural 
beauty. The caves of Malay Mountain were inhabited by sages who were Lord 
Shiva's devotees. The demons started causing obstacles in the rituals 

497 
 



performed by the sages. When Lord Shiva came to know about this, he 
instructed Indra to go to Malay Mountain and help the sages. Indra went to 
Malay Mountain and successfully drove out the demons from there. 
Narada again asked Pulastya as to why Indra was also known as Gotrabhit. 
Pulastya narrated the following tale- "After her son's death, Diti requested her 
husband, Kashyapa to bless her with another son so that Indra could be killed. 
Sage Kashyapa advised her that she would get her desire fulfilled after the 
successful accomplishment of her penance lasting for 100 divine years. 
In course of time, Diti became pregnant. One day, sage Kashyapa left for 
Udaygiri Mountain to do his penance and Diti was left all alone. 
One day, Indra arrived at the hermitage and expressed his desire to be at Diti's 
service if she permitted. Diti gave permission and Indra engaged himself in 
serving her. He used to keep the oblation site clean and bring dry wood 
necessary for the performance of Yagya. This continued for 1000 divine years. 
One day, Diti was taking rest after her bath. She had postponed her penance 
for sometime because of her impurity. As she was tired, very soon, she fell 
asleep. 
Seeing the moment opportune, Indra entered into her womb through her 
nostrils and cut the foetus into seven parts. After waking up, Diti realised 
about her foetus' destruction. Indra was very scared on the prospect of being 
cursed by Diti and said- "I am not the cause of your foetus' destruction. It has 
been destroyed due to your own impurity. So please don't curse me." Diti 
replied- "You are certainly not responsible for my foetus' destruction. It was 
all in my destiny. 
From the pieces of the foetus manifested the Marut Ganas and since Indra 
had tried to harm his own uterine brothers therefore he became famous as 
Gotrabhit. 
MARUT GANAS OF DIFFERENT MANVANTARAS 
Sage Pulastya says- "O Narada! Now, I am going to describe about the origin of 
Marut Ganas of various Manvantaras. Savan was Swayambhu Manu's son. He 

498 
 



had no sons and when he died, the sorrowful queen- Sudeva heard a heavenly 
voice, which instructed her to give up her life by jumping into the burning 
pyre.”  
“You would become a proud mother of seven sons", said the heavenly voice. 
The queen acted accordingly and died after jumping into the burning pyre.”  
“The souls of the dead king and queen ascended towards the sky. The 
prophesies made by the heavenly voice came true and Sudeva found herself in 
her periods. The king enjoyed a physical relationship with the queen for five 
days. Incidentally, few drops of sperms fell towards earth. 
After this both the souls departed towards Brahma loka. These falling drops of 
sperms were gathered by the wives of some sages and stored in a lotus 
flower. Those women were Samana, Nalini, Vayushmati, Chitra, Vishakha, 
Harita and Alini. They mistook the sperms for ambrosia and drank it after 
getting permission from their husbands. But after drinking it, they became 
devoid of their effulgence and were abandoned by their respective husbands. 
In course of time, they gave birth to seven sons who became famous as Adya 
Maruts during Swayambhu Manvantara." After having described about the 
Marut Ganas, sage Pulastya went on to describe about Swarochish 
Manvantara- "Kratudhwaj was the son of Swarochish Manu. He had seven 
sons. All of them went to Meru Mountain to do penance as they were 
desirous of Indra's kingdom. Indra being scared instructed Putna to create 
hurdles in their penance so that Kratudhwaj's sons wishes remained 
unfulfilled.”  
“Putna went to the place where Kratudhwaj's sons were doing penance. There 
was a river nearby where Kratudhwaj's sons arrived one day to bathe. Acting 
according to her plan, Putna too entered into the river to take bath. 
Kratudhwaj's sons were infatuated by her divine beauty. They could not 
control themselves and as a result, they had an ejaculation. Putna was 
successful in accomplishing her mission of corrupting the thoughts of 
Kratudhwaj's sons, who after realising that their penance had gone in vain 
returned to their father's kingdom. The released sperms of Kratudhwaj's sons 

499 
 



was swallowed by a fish named Shankhini. One day, she was caught by a 
fisherman and presented to Kratudhwaj's sons, who again released her into a 
nearby pond. In course of time, Shankhini died after giving birth to seven 
young fish. The seven young fish started crying at their mother's death. Lord 
Brahma appeared and advised them not to cry and for this reason, they were 
called Marut. Lord Brahma blessed them by saying- "All of you would attain 
the status of deities and would be capable of flying in the air." After finishing 
his story, sage Pulastya told Narada that this was how Marut Ganas originated 
during Swarochish Manvantara. 
Sage Pulastya says- "Now, I am going to describe about the Marut Ganas of 
Uttam Manvantara. 
Jyotishman was the son of Vayushman and his wife was the daughter of sage 
Brihaspati. As they were sonless, both of them decided to do penance to 
beget a son. The SaptaRishis arrived there and enquired as to why they were 
doing such a severe penance. Jyotishman's wife told the SaptaRishis that they 
were desirous of a son. The SaptaRishis blessed her by saying that she would 
become a mother of seven sons. In course of time, Jyotishman's wife became 
pregnant. One fateful day, Jyotishman passed away. His sorrowful wife 
wanted to commit Sati. While he was sitting on the burning pyre, suddenly, a 
piece of burning flesh fell into the nearby river and got fragmented into seven 
pieces. Seven Marut Ganas manifested from these seven pieces of flesh." Sage 
Pulastya says- "During Tamas Manvantara, Ritdhwaj, the son of Tamas Manu 
did a severe penance with the desire of getting a son. He made offerings of his 
own flesh, blood and sperms to the oblation fire. Suddenly, he heard a 
heavenly voice instructing him not to make offerings of his sperms. But the 
king continued with his offering and as a result, he died. After sometime, 
seven infants manifested from the oblation fire who later on became famous 
as the Marut Ganas of Tamas Manvantara." King Ripujeet was the descendant 
of Raivat. He was sonless and after being pleased by his extreme devotion, the 
deity Sun had blessed him with a daughter named Surati. In course of time, 
she grew into a beautiful woman. One day, Ripujeet passed away and a 

500 
 



grieved Surati decided to give up her life. The SaptaRishis arrived there and 
they were so infatuated by her beauty that they tried to prevent her from 
doing so. But unrelenting Surati did not listen and gave up her life by jumping 
into the burning pyre. The sorrowful SaptaRishis went away after casting lusty 
glances on her. Seven infants manifested from the burning pyre, who became 
famous as Marut Ganas of Raivat Manvantara. 
During Chakshush Manvantara, a sage named Manki did a tremendous 
penance at the banks of Saptasaraswat. But he fell down from grace after 
being infatuated by the beauty of an Apsara named Vapu. His sperms 
ejaculated and fell into the Saptasaraswat river from which manifested the 
seven Marut Ganas. 
LORD VISHNU KILLS KALNEMI  
After hearing the news of Bali's coronation, Maya and some other demons 
went and advised Bali to avenge the killings of his father- Virochan and other 
relatives by Indra. Bali became furious and marched with a huge army to fight 
the deities. 
When Indra heard this news, he started making preparations for the battle 
and very soon, the deities' army assembled at the foothills of Udyachal 
Mountain. A fierce battle was fought between both the armies. The 
movement of the troops covered the whole sky with dust which subsided only 
after the tremendous bloodbath wetted the earth with blood. Kartikeya 
fought valiantly in this battle and killed many demons. The demons too 
retaliated by vigorously attacking the deities. Lord Vishnu created havoc in the 
demons' army by killing many demons in a very short time. 
When Kalnemi- the demon saw that his comrades were scared of fighting Lord 
Vishnu, he attacked the deities with renewed vigour and swallowed many of 
the Yakshas, Kinnars and the deities. The deities became scared and started 
running away from the battlefield. The demons became delighted considering 
it as their victory and the defeat of Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu became furious 
and covered the Udyachal Mountain with a volley of arrows named Narach. 

501 
 



Bali and Maya became terrified and instigated Kalnemi to fight against Lord 
Vishnu. Kalnemi confronted Lord Vishnu with a mace but it was destroyed by 
Vishnu's chakra. After destroying Kalnemi's weapon, Lord Vishnu first severed 
both his hands and then his head. The news of Kalnemi's death spread like a 
wildfire in the demons army and they fled from the battlefield. 
KING BALI BALI RULES THE HEAVEN  
The mighty Banasura saw the demons running away from the battlefield and 
came to their rescue. The arrival of Banasura boosted the morale of the 
defeated demons and they returned to fight the deities. 
Lord Vishnu advised the deities to fight gallantly and disappeared from the 
battlefield. Shukracharya assured the demons of their victory because he 
thought that the deities would be no match for the demons might in the 
absence of Lord Vishnu. 
Once again, a fierce battle commenced. Bali attacked the deities ferociously 
with his mace. 
Banasura devastated the deities' army with his thousand hands. Ultimately, 
the deities were defeated in this battle and the heaven came under the 
control of demons. The defeated deities took refuge in Brahma loka after 
abandoning the heaven. Bali ruled the heaven with the help of his relatives. 
One day, Bali called his father- Prahlada to heaven and requested him to 
become the ruler of heaven but Prahlada refused by saying- "As I have chosen 
the path of Yoga after relinquishing everything, it would not be proper for me 
to get attached to worldly matters once again. Since you have snatched 
heaven from the deities on account of your valiance, hence the heaven 
belongs to you." Bali requested Prahlada to enlighten him on the duties of a 
king and on the virtuous deeds which would enable him in attaining Dharma, 
Arth, Kama and Moksha. 
Prahlada advised Bali to rule in a just manner and for the benediction of the 
world. He also advised Bali to engage himself in the service of all the three 

502 
 



castes so that they remain loyal to him. Prahlada said- "Virtuosity increases 
when people unwaveringly follow their Dharma. 
Increase in virtuosity helps a king to rule without any problem." Bali agreed to 
rule in a just manner as per the advice of Prahlada. 
THE SPLENDOURS OF BALI  
Pulastya says- "The just rule of Bali had transformed the Kali Yuga into Satya 
Yuga. Even his subjects engaged themselves in virtuous activities like penance 
and Yagyas. They practised nonviolence and always spoke the truth. One day, 
Goddess Trailokya Lakshmi went to Bali and said- "I have come to bless you 
because you are a victorious king. You have even defeated Indra and have 
control over all the three worlds." After saying this, Goddess Lakshmi entered 
into the body of Bali. 
During the reign of Bali, his subjects were happy and prosperous. Nobody 
experienced the pangs of hunger and everybody's desire was fulfilled. The 
prominence of virtuosity and religiousness during Bali's rule was incomparable 
and prosperity prevailed throughout his kingdom.  
 
MYTHOLOGICAL TALES  
DHUNDHU PERFORMS ASHWAMEDHA YAGYA  
Pulastya says- "During his pilgrimage, Prahlada visited many sacred places like 
Manas Tirtha, Kaushiki, Devahnad and Hastinapur etc. At last he reached the 
bank of river Yamuna where he worshipped Lord Trivikrama (Vamana)." 
Narada was surprised at the mention of Vamana's name and asked Pulastya- 
"Lord Vishnu is still to take Vamana incarnation then how come Prahlada 
visited his temple? Pulastya says-"Sage Kashyapa had an Aurasputra named 
Dhundhu. Lord Brahma had blessed Dhundhu of immortality. In course of 
time, Dhundhu defeated the deities and drove them out from heaven as a 
result of which, they had to take refuge in Brahma loka. 

503 
 



When Dhundhu came to know that the deities were living in Brahma loka, he 
decided to attack Brahma loka. He consulted the demons but they told him 
that it was impossible for them to reach Brahma loka. Sage Shukracharya said- 
"Indra had accomplished 100 Ashwamedha Yagyas by the virtue of which, he 
could go to Brahma loka. If you are desirous of reaching Brahma loka then you 
too will have to perform Ashwamedha Yagya." Dhundhu expressed his 
willingness to perform Ashwamedha Yagya. 
Shukracharya started making preparations for Ashwamedha Yagya at the bank 
of river Devika. 
He appointed his disciples and some other sages belonging to Bhargava's clan 
to supervise the Yagya ceremony. The Ashwamedha Yagya commenced and a 
horse was let loose according to the tradition. 
When the deities came to know about this Ashwamedha Yagya being 
performed by Dhundhu, they were scared and requested Lord Vishnu to 
disrupt the Yagya so that Dhundhu could not reach Brahma loka. Lord Vishnu 
assured the deities and went to the site where Dhundhu was performing 
Ashwamedha Yagya in a dwarf appearance. He entered into the Devika River 
and started drowning according to his plan. 
When the demons saw the dwarf (Lord Vishnu) drowning, they rushed to save 
him. After taking him out from the river, they asked him about his identity. 
The dwarf said- "I am the youngest son of Prabhas. My name is Gatibhas and 
my elder brother is Netrabhas. After our father's death, my elder brother did 
not give me my due share in the property. When I insisted, he flung me into 
this river." The Brahmins who were performing the Yagya requested Dhundhu 
to donate wealth to Gatibhas. 
Dhundhu agreed and said- "I am willing to fulfil all your wishes. Demand 
anything you like. 
Gatibhas demanded a small piece of land measured by three steps. Lord 
Vishnu then revealed his giant appearance and covered the whole earth with 
his first step. His second step covered the heaven and there was no place left 

504 
 



for his third step. Lord Vishnu became furious and put his third step on the 
back of Dhundhu as a result of which he was crushed to death. A large pit 
measuring 1000 Yojans was created due to the impact of his weight and Lord 
Vishnu threw Dhundhu's dead body in that pit." After completing his story, 
Pulastya told Narada- "This is how Lord Vishnu became Trivikrama for the first 
time to defeat the evil designs of Dhundhu. Prahlada paid a visit to the temple 
of Vamana situated at the place where Dhundhu was killed.  
PURURAVA REGAINS HIS GOOD LOOKS  
Pulastya says- "After worshipping Lord Trivikrama, Prahlada went to 
Lingabhedak Mountain and worshipped Lord Shankar. He also visited many 
more sacred places like Kedar Tirtha, Badrikashrama, Bhadrakarna and 
Vipasha. At last, he reached Irawati and worshipped that Almighty Lord with 
whose blessings, Pururava was able to regain his good looks." Narada was 
curious to know this story. 
Pulastya says- " 
Once upon a time, there lived a rich trader named Sudharma.  
Once, while passing through the Surashtra desert, he was attacked by bandits 
and robbed of all his possessions. Dejected, he started wandering in the 
desert like a lunatic. He saw a Shami tree and decided to take rest under its 
shade. On this tree lived numerous ghosts. On seeing Sudharma, the leader of 
the ghosts asked him as to where he was going. Sudharma narrated his woeful 
tale which made the ghosts very sad. The leader of the ghosts said- You must 
not lose heart. If you are destined to possess wealth then you would become 
wealthy once again but worrying about your lost wealth will only have ill 
effects on your health and you would become weak. On being instructed by 
their leader, the ghosts offered food to the hungry Sudharma. After satiating 
his hunger, Sudharma asked the leader of the ghosts- Who are you? How 
could you provide me such a delicious dish in this deserted forest? The leader 
of the ghosts said- "In my previous birth, I was a Brahmin and my name was 
Somasharma. I was very poor but my neighbour Somashrava was a rich and 

505 
 



prosperous trader. Being a poor Brahmin, I was not able to perform my 
religious duties.  
Once, people of all castes thronged Irawati and Nadvala to take a holy dip on 
the auspicious occasion of Shravana Dwadashi. I followed them and after 
taking my bath, performed all the necessary rituals. As I was poor, I could 
donate things of little importance like umbrella, shoes, sweets, curds etc. This 
was the first and the last time, I had donated anything in my life. 
After my death, I became a ghost. My companions also never donated 
anything in their previous life. The delicious food which you had relished just 
now was due to the virtue of food items donated in my previous life. This 
Shami tree is due to the virtue of donating umbrella." Somasharma was 
surprised and asked the leader of the ghosts whether he could be of any help 
to him to which the leader requested him to offer Pind Dan at Gaya so that he 
became liberated from Preta Yoni. Somasharma went to Gaya and performed 
the necessary rituals of Pind Dan as a result of which, the ghosts went to 
Brahma loka after being liberated. 
Somasharma continued to observe the fast of Shravana Dwadashi every year. 
One fateful day, he passed away and was reborn in a royal family. After 
reaching youth age, he became the king of Shakal Puri and indulged in 
enjoyments and sensual pleasures. After his death, he was born in a Brahmin 
family. Though ugly, he was well versed in all the scriptures. After a few years, 
he got married. His wife would make fun of his ugly looks which annoyed him. 
He went to Irawati and worshipped Lord Jagannath with full devotion. Lord 
Jagannath blessed him and his ugly looks turned into a handsome appearance. 
He enjoyed a very satisfied married life and after his death was reborn as King 
Pururava. 
THE DESCRIPTION OF NAKSHATRA PURUSHA 
Sage Narada asks Pulastya about the austerity named Nakshatra Purusha 
which King Pururava had accomplished to please Lord Vishnu. Pulastya says- 
"All the constellations dwell in different parts of Lord Vishnu's body. The Mula 

506 
 



Nakshatra dwells in his feet, Rohini Nakshatra in his thighs, Ashwini in his 
knees, Purvashadha and Uttarashadha in his chest etc. A devotee who 
worships Lord Vishnu- the possessor of all the constellations methodically and 
according to the rituals attains liberation. Worshipping Lord Vishnu's different 
organs helps in attaining good health and a disease free life. Being pleased by 
this austerity, Lord Vishnu bestows radiance and sweet voice to the devotee. 
Arundhati had achieved great acclamation due to the successful 
accomplishment of this austerity. Aditya with a desire of a son had his wish 
fulfilled in the form of Revant, his famous son. The Apsaras Rambha and 
Menaka had acquired unparalleled beauty and sweet voice respectively after 
successful accomplishment of this austerity. Similarly, Chandra had attained 
supreme radiance and Pururava regained his kingdom. This way, whoever 
performed this austerity, his desire was fulfilled. 
PRAHLADA'S PILGRIMAGE  
Pulastya says- "Prahlada went to the sacred place called Rishikanya and took a 
holy dip in the Irawati River. After that, he worshipped Lord Janardan in the 
temple situated nearby and then proceeded on his journey towards 
Kurukshetra. After reaching there, he worshipped Lord Kurudhwaj and paid a 
visit Lord Narsimha temple. After taking a holy dip in the river Devika, he 
proceeded on towards Gokarna Tirtha where he took bath in river Prachi and 
worshipped Lord Vishwakarma. Ultimately after visiting numerous sacred 
places, he reached Madhunandini where he worshipped Lord Shiva who had a 
chakra in his hands and Lord Vishnu possessing a trident." Narada was 
surprised and asked Pulastya why Lord Shiva and Lord Vishnu had held 
Sudarshan chakra and trident respectively. Pulastya explained- "During 
ancient times, there was a mighty demon king named Jalodbhav. He had 
pleased Lord Brahma by his severe penance and was blessed by him to 
become immortal. After receiving the boon, Jalodbhav became arrogant and 
started tormenting the deities and the sages. The deities sought the refuge of 
Lord Vishnu. They accompanied Lord Vishnu to Himalaya Mountain to meet 
Lord Shiva. Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva exchanged their weapons. Both of 

507 
 



them went to kill the demon who on seeing them got scared and hid in a 
nearby river. Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva waited eagerly for him on the 
opposite banks of the river.”  
“After sometime, Jalodbhav came out of the river thinking that both of them 
must have departed by now. He climbed up the Himalaya Mountain and both 
the deities chased him. Lord Shiva attacked him with his chakra while Lord 
Vishnu pierced his trident in his chest. Jalodbhav died and fell down from the 
Himalaya Mountain." After finishing his story, Pulastya says- "This was the 
reason why both Lord Vishnu and Lord Shankar had exchanged their weapons. 
The spot where Lord Shankar had kept his foot resulted into the manifestation 
of river Vitasta. Prahlada after worshipping Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva at 
Madhunandini went to Bhrigutung Tirtha situated on the Himalaya 
Mountain." TALES OF UPAMANYU AND SRIDAMASage Narada was still not 
satisfied by Pulastya's explanation and asked Pulastya as to what compelled 
Lord Vishnu to give his chakra to Lord Shiva. Pulastya says- "There used to live 
a learned Brahmin named Veetmanyu. He was well versed in all the Vedas and 
other scriptures. 
His wife's name was Atreyi and Upamanyu was his son. Inspite of his 
knowledge, Veetmanyu lived in absolute poverty and found it difficult to make 
arrangements for daily necessities. One day, young Upamanyu on being 
hungry started crying. His helpless mother consoled him by saying that if he 
worshipped Lord Shiva then he would even get nectar and would get liberated 
from the pangs of hunger for ever. Veetmanyu was surprised and asked as to 
who this Lord Virupaksh was. Atreyi narrated the following story- During 
ancient times, there was a demon king named Sridama. He ruled over the 
whole earth.  
Once, he decided to snatch the SrivatsaLord Vishnu's dearest ornament from 
him. When Lord Vishnu came to know about his intention, he became furious 
but since he had no weapon at his disposal he went to take Lord Shiva's help 
in this regard. Lord Shiva gave Sudarshan chakra to him and said that with the 
help of that infallible weapon, he could kill anybody. But Lord Vishnu was not 

508 
 



convinced about the weapon's destructive power and expressed his desire to 
test it on Lord Shiva himself. Lord Shiva agreed and Vishnu released the 
Sudarshan chakra towards him. As a result, Lord Shiva's body was severed into 
three parts- Vishvesh, Yagyesh and Yagyayajak. Now, Lord Vishnu became 
satisfied and made salutations to Lord Shiva to express his gratitude.”  
“Lord Vishnu went to the mountain where the demon Sridama lived and 
severed his head with the Sudarshan chakra. After killing the demon, Lord 
Vishnu returned to his abode- Ksheersagar." After finishing her story, Atreyi 
told Upamanyu that such was the greatness of Lord Virupaksh. 
Upamanyu did a severe penance to please Lord Virupaksh and was blessed by 
him as a result of which, he never felt hungry in his life. 
GAJENDRA AND THE CROCODILE  
Sage Narada requests Pulastya to describe how Gajendra managed to release 
itself from the jaws of the crocodile. Pulastya says- "There lived a crocodile in 
a reservoir near Trikut Mountain. One day, a thirsty elephant arrived there to 
quench its thirst. The wicked crocodile caught hold of the elephant's leg and 
dragged it towards the middle of the reservoir. The elephant tried its best to 
release itself from the crocodile's jaws but was unsuccessful. Being helpless, it 
started remembering Lord Sri Hari as it was his great devotee. It picked up a 
lotus flower and chanted the following stotra- 'Salutations to that Lord Vishnu 
who is the originator of this universe. 
Salutations to the omnipresent Lord Vishnu who is revered by the sages. I take 
the refuge of Lord Vishnu who is also known by the names of Vishveshvar, Sri 
Hari and Sanatan Purusha.' This way, the elephant eulogised Lord Vishnu with 
great devotion. 
Pleased by his devotion, Lord Vishnu killed the wicked crocodile with his 
Sudarshan chakra and liberated the elephant. Actually, this crocodile was 
none other than Gandharva Huhu who had attained the form of a crocodile 
after being cursed by sage Deval. He was liberated from the curse and went to 
heaven. Lord Vishnu touched the elephant and it got transformed into a divine 

509 
 



human being. This way, with the blessings of Lord Vishnu, both of them were 
liberated. 
THE GREATNESS OF SARASWAT STOTRA 
Sage Pulastya says- "There lived a Kshatriya who kept enemity towards 
Brahmins. After his death, he was reborn as a demon and spent his life 
indulging in nefarious activities.  
Once he saw a hermit doing penance. He wanted to devour him but was 
unsuccessful in his attempt as the hermit had protected himself by chanting 
Vishnupanjar stotra. So, he waited for the hermit for four months to come out 
from his meditative trance. After the completion of his meditation, the hermit 
was surprised to see a weak and frail demon waiting for him. He asked the 
demon about his identity and the purpose for which he was waiting there. The 
demon told him that although he had come with the intention of devouring 
him, he was unsuccessful in his attempt as he (hermit) was well protected by 
Vishnupanjar stotra. "I am very impressed by your spiritual feats and I am 
desirous of learning the same from you. I have committed many sins in my 
life, so tell me how to become liberated from them", asked the demon. But 
the hermit was not convinced and told the demon that he would never preach 
a demon. He advised the demon to take help of some other Brahmin. The 
demon went in search of another Brahmin. One day, he saw a Brahmin doing 
penance and caught hold of him. The Brahmin was frightened and requested 
the demon- "Wait until I return after giving this fruit to my teacher." But the 
demon thought that the Brahmin was trying to escape hence he did not allow 
the Brahmin to leave. The worried Brahmin went near a burning fire and 
pleaded for help. Suddenly, Goddess Saraswati manifested herself and told 
the Brahmins- "Don't be afraid. With my blessings, you would be able to 
narrate the means for the demon's benediction." After blessing the Brahmin, 
Goddess Saraswati disappeared. 
The Brahmin narrated the Saraswat stotra to the demon- You must chant the 
following stotra thrice in a day- 'I make salutations to Lord Hari who is also 
known as Krishna, HRishikesh, Vasudev, Janardan and Jagannath. May he 

510 
 



liberate me from my sins. I make salutations to Lord Vishnu who rests on 
Sheshnag and who hails Shankchakra Gada and chakra in his hands, may he 
liberate me from my sins. Lord Vishnu who manifests himself in each 
individual soul just like the element of fire manifests itself in a piece of wood. 
May he liberate me from my sins.' The Brahmin told the demon that the daily 
chanting of Saraswat Vishnu stotra would enable him to get liberated from his 
sins. The demon was pleased and after releasing the Brahmin went to a place 
called Shalgram. He engaged himself in severe penance and started chanting 
the stotra taught by the Brahmin. 
Ultimately, he was successful in becoming liberated from his sins and went to 
Vishnu loka. 
BALI PERFORMS ASWHAMEDHA YAGYA BALI'S ARRIVAL AT KURUKSHETRA 
Pulastya says- "After the departure of Prahlada on his pilgrimage, Bali desirous 
of performing a Yagya went to Kurukshetra. Shukracharya had invited the 
descendants of sage Bhargava to supervise the proceedings of Ashwamedha 
Yagya but his decision was not approved by the descendants of some other 
sages like Atri, Gautam, Kaushik and Angira. As a result, all of them left 
Kurukshetra. 
After their departure, Shukracharya started making preparations for the Yagya 
and initiated both Bali and his wife- Vindhyavali into the rituals. After that, a 
horse was let loose according to the tradition. The demon Tarkaksh followed 
that horse. The Ashwamedha Yagya continued for three months after which, 
Aditi gave birth to a child who was dwarfish in size at a time when the Sun had 
juts entered the zodiac of Gemini. All the deities and sages including Lord 
Brahma were extremely pleased by Lord Vamana's birth. They went to Aditi's 
hermitage and eulogised Lord Vamana. Lord Vamana became pleased by their 
eulogy and requested Lord Brahma to help perform his consecrations. On 
being instructed by Lord Brahma, sage Bharadwaj performed Vamana's Jat 
karma and Yagyopavit. After that, sage Bharadwaj taught him Vedas and other 
scriptures which was mastered by Vamana in less than one month. After 
finishing his studies, Lord Vamana sought his Guru's permission to go to 

511 
 



Kurukshetra. Sage Bharadwaj expressed his inability by saying- "How can a 
mortal like me give permission to the supreme lord? If you want to go to 
Kurukshetra then how can I stop you from going there? I have some queries 
regarding your various abodes and would you be gracious enough to enlighten 
me on that?" Lord Vamana said- "The whole universe including the sky, earth, 
ocean, mountains, clouds are pervaded by my existence. All the deities, sages, 
living and non-living things have manifested from me. When I took my first 
incarnation of Matsya I had my abode in the holy waters of Manas Sarovar. As 
my second incarnation of tortoise, I had my abode in the holy waters of 
Kaushiki River. I had my abode at Hastinapur when I took my incarnation as 
Govind. As Narayan, I had my abode at Badrikashrama, as Jayesh, I had my 
abode at Bhadrakarna." This way, Lord Vamana described about his different 
abodes in great detail. 
ARRIVAL OF LORD VAMANA AT KURUKSHETRA  
Pulastya says- "After satisfying Bharadwaj's curiosity about his different 
abodes, Lord Vamana left for Kurukshetra where Bali was busy performing his 
Yagya. As soon as Lord Vamana reached Kurukshetra, the whole earth started 
shaking violently and high tides rose in the ocean. 
Being frightened of Lord Vishnu, Agni did not accept the offerings made by 
Bali. Bali was very surprised by all these sudden developments. He asked 
Shukracharya about the reason for all these strange happenings." 
Shukracharya replied- "O king of the demons! Definitely, all these strange 
happenings signifies the arrival of Lord Vasudev." Bali then asked 
Shukracharya as to what was the most appropriate way of honoring his 
eminent guest. "What donations should I make to him so that he is pleased 
and satisfied?", asked Bali. Shukracharya warned him by saying- "Forget about 
donating anything otherwise you will get into serious trouble." Bali told him 
that he would not disgrace himself by refusing to meet the demands made by 
Vasudev. "The way a man behaves in his speech, action and thoughts is the 
result of his past karmas. Are you not aware of the incident related with 

512 
 



Koshkar which happened at Malay Mountain? Koshkar was the son of sage 
Mudgal. 
He was famous for his austerities and his wife too was very virtuous. In course 
of time, a son was born to them but alas he was blind and deaf. Koshkar's wife 
abandoned that child in front of her house. Incidentally, an ogress named 
Surpakshi happened to arrive there and after seeing the abandoned child, 
exchanged him with her own child. She carried Koshkar's child to Shalodar 
Mountain with the intention of devouring him. When her husband came to 
know about the incident, he reprimanded Surpakshi for her misdeed. The 
demon warned the ogress that both of them would be cursed by the Brahmin 
and advised her to keep the child at the same place from where she had 
brought him." In the meantime, Koshkar came out from his hermitage after 
hearing the cries of Surpakshi's child. He was surprised to find some other 
child instead of his own and told his wife- "It seems that this child is under the 
influence of a ghost." After saying this, he protected the child by demarcating 
a round circle initiated with mantra around him. Right then, the ogress arrived 
and after keeping the Brahmin's child on the ground wanted to take back her 
own child. But she could not enter inside that circle. Koshkar took his child in 
his lap and went inside the hermitage. 
This way, the ogress returned to the mountain without her child. 
Koshkar brought up both the children with great care. He named the ogress's 
child as Diwakar while his own son was named Nisachar. As destiny would 
have liked it, Diwakar turned out to be a very studious child and became well 
versed in Vedas within a very short time whereas Nisachar was not interested 
in studies and had a bad habit of criticising everybody. Koshkar became 
furious and threw Nisachar in a well. There was a Amla tree inside that well 
and the child survived living on its fruits. This way, ten years passed and one 
day, Koshkar's wife arrived at the well to fetch water. On seeing his mother, 
Nisachar tried to convince her that he was her son but she was not convinced. 
He then accompanied his mother back home and narrated the reason why he 
had taken birth as a deaf and blind child. "In my previous birth, I was the son 

513 
 



of Vrishakapi and was very famous for my scholarly traits. In due course of 
time, I became very arrogant and started indulging in all sorts of evil deeds. 
After my death, I went to Raurav Narak and suffered all the tortures over 
there. I was reborn as a tiger and after being enslaved by a king, I was kept 
inside a cage.  
Once, the king had gone out and the beautiful queen arrived near the cage. I 
was infatuated by her beauty and expressed my lusty desires to her. She was 
taken aback by my proposal and said- "How can physical relationship be 
possible between us?" But I requested her to release me by opening the cage 
door. The queen opened the door and I became free. I caught hold of her and 
tried to satiate my lust but right then the guards arrived there and killed me.  
Once again I went to the hell and after suffering the pains I was reborn as an 
ass. My master was Agniveshya, a Brahmin.  
Once, his wife- Sumati wanted to go to her father's house. 
Agniveshya advised her to go riding on my back and instructed his servant to 
escort us. While on our journey, we reached a river and Sumati expressed her 
desire to take bath. She went to take bath and I waited for her to return. 
While she was taking her bath, I became infatuated by her beauty and caught 
hold of her. The servant who was escorting us saw this and became angry. He 
killed me by hitting with his stick.  
Once again, I went to hell and was reborn as a parrot. A wicked fowler trapped 
and sold me to a trader's son. Although I lived a luxurious life, yet I was not 
happy because of my slavery.  
Once, his daughter arrived near my cage and playfully kept me on her breasts. 
I became infatuated and tried to have physical relations with her. But I was 
suffocated to death after getting entangled in her necklace.  
Once again, I went to hell and after suffering the tortures, was reborn as a 
bull. My master was a Chandala and I used to pull his cart. 
Once, his wife was sitting in the cart I was pulling. Unmindful of her 
surroundings, she was singing songs in a beautiful voice. After listening to her 

514 
 



melodious voice, I became infatuated and tried to have physical relations with 
her. I turned back but the noose around my neck became tight and I was 
suffocated to death.  
Once again I went to hell and after suffering the pains, was reborn as a blind 
and deaf son to you. I remember all my previous lives and I am aware that my 
physical disabilities are only because of my past sins. I have decided to atone 
for all my sins by doing penance and indulging in virtuous deeds. After saying 
this, he went to Badrikashrama to do penance. 
After finishing his story, Bali told Shukracharya that a man inherits his qualities 
from his past life and it is impossible for him to change them. "It is applicable 
to both good and bad qualities. My penance, virtuosity, benevolence and 
generosity have been inherited from my past life and come what may, I have 
decided not to shun them." Pulastya says- "This way, Bali remained firm in his 
resolve to meet any demand made by his esteemed guest and started waiting 
eagerly for his arrival."  
LORD VAMANA'S DEMANDS  
Bali was pleased that he would get an opportunity to see the Almighty God 
whom the sages contemplate upon. He was proud of his good fortune that the 
Lord was paying him a visit. 
Shukracharya aware of the reason for Vamana's arrival warned Bali against 
making any promise to him. Bali replied- "How can I refuse if the Almighty God 
demands anything from me? I am willing to face any hardship to safeguard my 
benevolent image. I don't mind if the deities get benefited by my actions. Even 
if the Lord is coming with the intention of killing me, I am not scared as that is 
how I would attain salvation. Come what may, I am not going to abandon my 
charitable nature." As the conversation between Shukracharya and Bali 
continued, suddenly, Lord Vamana arrived at the site. Vamana's radiance 
subdued the power of all demons present there. Lord Vamana being 
impressed by the grandeur of Vamana's Yagya complimented him for 
organising such a magnificent Yagya. Bali eulogised and worshipped his 

515 
 



esteemed guest. He requested Vamana to reveal the reason of his arrival and 
promised that his wishes would be fulfilled. Lord Vamana smiled and told him 
that he needed a small piece of land measured by three steps for the 
performance of Yagya. Bali was surprised by this demand and requested him 
to ask for more land but Lord Vamana told him that he needed only that much 
land. 
Bali agreed and took a vow to donate a piece of land measured by three steps. 
Hardly had Bali taken his vow, when suddenly Lord Vamana expanded his size. 
His first step covered the whole earth. By his two successive steps, he covered 
the two worlds. This way, Bali was forced to donate all the three worlds 
according to his vow. Lord Vishnu then made Indra, the king of all the three 
worlds and sent Bali to the nether world named Sutal. He blessed Bali by 
saying- "You would enjoy a long life till the end of this present Kalpa. You 
would hold the post of Indra till the arrival of Savarni Manavantar. As long as 
you remain supportive of the Brahmins and the deities, you would enjoy all 
the pleasures of life. But if you go against their wishes then you would be 
fastened by Varuna's noose." After saying this, Lord Vishnu disappeared. 
LORD BRAHMA WORSHIPS LORD VAMANA  
Narada asked sage Pulastya as to where did Lord Vamana go after 
disappearing from the oblation site. Pulastya replied- "Lord Vamana went to 
Brahma loka mounted on his Garuda. On seeing him, Lord Brahma gave a 
warm reception and after worshipping him asked about the reason for his 
sudden arrival. Lord Vamana told him that he had sent Bali to Sutal loka for 
the welfare of the deities and so that they could get their share of the Yagya. 
Lord Brahma expressed his desire to see the giant form of Vishnu which he 
had taken while measuring all the three worlds. Lord Vishnu obliged him and 
showed his giant appearance. Lord Brahma was impressed and eulogised him. 
He requested Lord Vishnu to remain in Brahma loka in his appearance of 
Vamana. Lord Vishnu had agreed to do this and remained there. 
BALI LIVES IN PATAL LOKA  

516 
 



Pulastya says- After reaching the nether world, Bali got constructed a 
beautiful city made of diamonds and other precious stones. Vishwakarma had 
constructed an enormous sized altar in the central part of the city. The 
windows of Bali's palace were well decorated with pearls. Bali lived there in 
luxury and by enjoying all the pleasures of life. 
One day, while the demons were engaged in their sensual pleasures, suddenly 
the fearsome Sudarshan chakra entered Bali's palace and after making the 
demons bereft of their radiance went back to Lord Vishnu. Bali was very 
worried and thought that only his grandfather Prahlada could help him out 
from this situation. On being remembered by Bali, Prahlada appeared before 
him. 
Bali requested him to describe the means which would be benedictory to him. 
Prahlada was pleasantly surprised by his change of heart and said- "At last, 
you have realised your mistake. 
Listen Bali! A man who takes refuge in Lord Vishnu and surrenders himself to 
his will becomes liberated from all the miseries and sorrows of life. A man 
who has accepted Lord Vishnu as his master need not fear from anything not 
even death. All the things which are visible in this universe are the various 
manifestations of Lord Vishnu himself. A devotee of Lord Vishnu does not 
have to go to hell and he becomes liberated from the cycles of birth and 
death." This way, Prahlada described about the greatness of Lord Vishnu and 
his worship in great detail. 
BALI'S QUERIES TO PRAHLADA  
Bali enquired about the virtues which a man attains by the worship of Lord 
Vishnu. He also asked Prahlada about the worship and its rituals by which Lord 
Vishnu is pleased. Prahlada says- "Sages believe that the donations which are 
made with total devotion and in the name of Lord Vishnu exist forever. Lord 
Vishnu is extremely pleased if Malati, Shatavari, Champa, Juhi and Nagar 
flowers are offered to him. He is also pleased when the offerings of Bilva 
patra, Shami patra, Tamal and Amali patra are made to him. He is pleased 

517 
 



when sesame seeds are donated during the Hindu month of Magh. A person 
who gets a Vishnu temple constructed liberates his ancestors from their sins. 
Bali, you must get the Vishnu temple constructed and worship with complete 
devotion. You must try to please Lord Vishnu by making donations of cow, 
jewels, gold and land. If you engage yourself in such virtuous activities then 
you will certainly attain benediction." After saying this, Prahlada disappeared. 
After Prahlada's departure, Bali followed his instructions faithfully and 
engaged himself in the worship of Lord Vishnu. He instructed Vishwakarma to 
construct a magnificent temple of Lord Vishnu and started worshipping Lord 
Vishnu accompanied by his wife. He used to clean the temple premises and 
offer the articles which were dear to Lord Vishnu. This way, Bali and his wife 
Vindhyavali engaged themselves in the worship of Lord Vishnu with complete 
devotion. 
BENEFITS OF STUDYING VAMANA PURANA 
Study of Vamana Purana helps a man to enhance his knowledge and makes 
him free from all kinds of worldly attachments. It also increases his love and 
devotion towards the lotus feet of Lord Vishnu. There are ten characteristics 
evident in all the Puranas- 1) Sarg. 2)Visarg. 3) Sthan. 
4) Poshan. 5) Uti. 6) Vritti. 7) Raksha. 8) Manvantara. 9) Vansh. 10) Upashraya. 
Sarg deals with the descriptions of the origin of this universe. Visarg 
enlightens us as to how a living thing transforms itself from one species to 
another. Sthan, Poshan, Uti and Vritti deal with the descriptions of various 
means which are employed by a man for his survival. Raksha describes about 
the various incarnations of Lord Vishnu which he takes for the protection of 
the humankind. Manvantara deals with the complete description of the 
history of the whole Manvantara period. Vansh describe about the lineage of 
all the kings including Lord Brahma. 
Upashraya enlightens us on the real meaning of Brahma. 
Pulastya says- "A man who listens to the divine tales of Vamana Purana attains 
to Vishnu loka after becoming free from all his sins. He attains the same 

518 
 



virtues which a performer of Ashwamedha Yagya does. Even listening to one 
part of Vamana Purana bestows great virtues and equivalent to making 
pilgrimage of numerous sacred places. Narada, Vamana Purana is the 14th 
among all the 18 Puranas which describes about the majesty of Lord Vishnu." 
Five names of Lord Vishnu have been mentioned in Vamana Purana- Karan 
Vamana, Narayan, Amitvikrama, Shargang chakra and Purushaottam. A 
devotee who chants any of these sacred names of Lord Vishnu and makes 
salutation either by speech, thought or deed attains to Vishnu loka. 
 
VAMANA INCARNATION  
INDRA DOES PENANCE TO ATONE FOR HIS SINS  
Pulastya says after being defeated by the demons Indra went to Brahma loka 
and narrated his woeful tale to him. Sage Kashyapa- his father was also 
present there. Lord Brahma told Indra that he was reaping the fruits of his evil 
deeds. Sage Kashyapa told him that his miseries were due to the sin acquired 
by the destruction of Diti's foetus. Indra asked both of them, how his sins 
could be atoned. Lord Brahma advised him to take Sri Hari's help. 
Indra then went to the north of Kalinjar Mountain and started living in a 
hermitage situated on the bank of river Mahanadi. He did penance for one 
year. Pleased by his devotion, Lord Vishnu appeared and blessed him saying- 
"Your austere penance has liberated you from the sin of destroying Diti's 
foetus and very soon, you will regain your kingdom." After receiving the 
blessing, Indra went to Aditi's hermitage and narrated the tale of his defeat at 
the hands of demons. Aditi knew that Indra would not have been defeated 
had Lord Vishnu been on his side during the battle. So, she went to Lord 
Vishnu and worshipped him with devotion. Lord Vishnu assured her that very 
soon, he would incarnate as her son and destroy the demons. Having said this, 
a part of Lord Vishnu's effulgence entered into Aditi's womb. 
BALI ABUSES LORD VISHNU 

519 
 



After Lord Vishnu had established himself inside Aditi's womb, the demons 
became devoid of their radiance. Bali was surprised by this sudden 
development and asked Prahlada about it. 
Prahlada went into deep meditation and saw Lord Vishnu manifesting in 
Aditi's womb. After coming out from his meditative trance, he told Bali that 
the demons had lost their radiance due to Sri Hari who is about to take 
incarnation at the request of the deities. 
The arrogant Bali made fun of Sri Hari by saying- "Who is this Sri Hari? We 
have many mighty warriors in our ranks who are more powerful than 
Vasudev." Prahlada was a devotee of Sri Hari and he did not like the arrogant 
utterances of Bali. He cursed him by saying that very soon he would meet his 
downfall and lose his kingdom. After being cursed, Bali realised his mistake 
and begged for forgiveness. Prahlada too had calmed down by that time and 
said- "Even though Lord Vishnu is omnipresent, I cursed you being under the 
influence of my ignorance. My words will certainly become true but don't lose 
heart. Go and take refuge in Sri Hari- the supreme protector. He will liberate 
you from all your sorrows." After saying this, Prahlada went on his pilgrimage. 
THE DEITIES RESTING DAYS  
Lord Vishnu takes rest on Sheshnag during the whole period of Uttarayan, 
which begins just after the last day of the bright lunar phase in the Hindu 
month of Ashadh is over. After he goes to sleep, all the deities, Gandharva, 
Devamata etc. follow suit. 
Narada requested Sage Pulastya to shed light on the days when the deities 
take rest. Sage Pulastya replied- "A devotee should consider the eleventh day 
of the Hindu month of Ashadh Shukla Paksha, when the Sun enters the zodiac 
of Gemini as the day when Lord Vishnu goes to rest. A devotee should make a 
replica of Sheshnag and after worshipping the idol of Lord Vishnu, lay him 
down to rest on the twelfth day. Kamadev is said to take rest on the thirteenth 
day on his bed made of Kadamb flowers. The Yakshaganas take rest on the 
fourteenth day of the Hindu month of Ashadh Shukla Paksha. Their beds are 

520 
 



made of yellow lotus. Lord Shiva is believed to take rest on Purnima. His bed is 
made of tiger skin. 
Home  
  

521 
 



6. MARKANDEYA PURANA  
 
INTRODUCTION  
Once Jaimini, a disciple of sage Veda Vyasa expressed his curiosity before 
Markandeya- 'O Lord! In the great epic Mahabharata, which was created by 
Veda Vyasa, description of Dharma, Arth, Kama and Moksha appears to be 
intertwined at times and at other times, it appears to be separate from one 
another. Veda Vyasa had described the norms, the stages and the means to 
perform the duties in all the four stages. This epic contains cryptic knowledge 
of Vedas. Hence O great sage! I have approached you in order to grasp the full 
knowledge contained in Mahabharata with your help. Why did Lord take 
human incarnation even though He is the cause of the origin, perpetuation 
and destruction of the universe? How did Draupadi become the wife of five 
Pandavas? How did Balarama expiate for the sin of killing a Brahmin? How did 
Draupadi's sons give up their lives? Kindly narrate all these things in detail. ' 
Markandeya says- 'O Muni! Presently I am engaged in evening worship. Hence 
I do not have time to narrate these things in detail. But I am telling you about 
the birds which will narrate you the entire content of Mahabharata. Those 
birds will also remove all your doubts. Sons of the great bird Drona- 
Pingaksha, Vibodha, Suputra, Sumuk etc. stay in the caves among the hills of 
Vindhyachal. They are proficient in Vedas. Go and ask them, they will remove 
all your doubts.' Markandeya's words surprised Jaimini. To confirm, he asked 
again- 'It is surprising that the birds could narrate the content of Mahabharata 
just like human beings. It is even more surprising that they are proficient in 
Vedas knowledge, which is even rare to find among humans. Kindly tell me 
how did they come to acquire such profound knowledge despite having being 
born in the form of birds. Why do you call them as the sons of Drona?' 
Markandeya says- 'Long ago, a strange event took place in Nandanvan 
involving Indra, DevRishi Narada and some of the apsaras. One day, Indra was 
enjoying his time in the Nandanvan forest along with his apsaras. At the same 
time Narada also arrived there. Indra welcomed and offered him a seat. The 

522 
 



apsaras also greeted Narada. Indra then said- 'Munivar! Tell me what you 
desire now? If you desire to listen to a song, should I order the Gandharvas or 
if you wish to watch the dance, should I order one of my apsaras, Menka, 
Rambha, Mishrakeshi or Urvashi? Any of these four can perform a seducing 
dance before you.' Narada expressed his desire to watch the dance of an 
apsara, who was superior in beauty to the other apsaras. This led to a row 
among the apsaras. Each one of them was proud of her beauty and talent. 
Narada then advised them to test their beauty by breaking sage Durvasa's 
penance who was at that time staying on a hilltop. All the apsaras expressed 
their inability to perform this task successfully. Only an apsara named Vapu, 
driven by her haughtiness accepted to break the penance of sage Durvasa. 
Accordingly she reached the hill where Durvasa was staying and began to sing 
an infatuating song in her sweet voice. Very soon, the song began to show its 
effect on Durvasa. Attracted by the sweet voice, Durvasa went in search of the 
origin of the voice and found Vapu singing at a distance. Durvasa understood 
that the apsara had come to break his penance. Angrily, he cursed the apsara 
that she would take birth in the lineage of the birds for sixteen years, she 
would not bear a child and ultimately would be killed by a weapon to regain 
her heavenly abode. After saying this, sage Durvasa migrated to Akashganga. 
 
VARIOUS CREATIONS AND FAMOUS MYTHOLOGICAL CHARACTERS  
BIRTH OF FOUR BIRDS  
Markandeya says - 'In the lineage of the avian King Garuda, there were two 
brothers- Kank and Kandhar. One day, Kank visited Kailash Parbat where a 
demon Vidrayudrup, who was a slave of Kubera, was enjoying privacy with his 
wife and drinking wine. Seeing Kank, the demon showed his displeasure at his 
arrival at an improper time. But Kank boldly asserted his right on the 
mountain as according to him, it belonged to all. The infuriated demon 
decapitated Kank with his sword. 

523 
 



Hearing the news of his brother's killing, Kandhar resolved to kill the demon. 
After performing the last rites of his brother, he also arrived on the mountain 
where the demon Vidrayudrup was still drinking wine with his wife. The 
demon lost his temper again. Kandhar then challenged the demon to have a 
fight with him. A fierce battle ensued between them. Ultimately, Kandhar 
killed the demon. The demon's wife Madanika finding herself in a helpless 
situation accepted Kandhar as her husband. Thus, Kandhar returned to his 
palace with a newly found wife. Madanika was in fact the daughter of Menka, 
the apsara and could change her guise at will. After marrying Kandhar, she 
took the guise of the bird. The bird Madanika was born as apsara Vapu in her 
next birth due to the curse of sage Durvasa. Kandhar named her Tarkshi. 
A Brahmin named Mandapal had four sons. Drona was the youngest among 
them and proficient in scriptures, Vedas etc. Kandhar married his daughter, 
Tarkshi to Drona. After their marriage, Drona and Tarkshi were spending their 
time happily. Tarkshi conceived during the same time when the battle of 
Mahabharata was going on. As destiny would have it, Tarkshi flew over the 
battlefield where she saw Arjuna and Bhagdatt, the king of Pragjyotishpur, 
fighting valiantly against each other. Accidentally an arrow aimed at Bhagdatt 
went in the direction of Tarkshi and struck her in the abdomen and tore it 
apart. As a result of this, four eggs fell on the ground. At the same time, a 
huge bell fell from Supratik's neck, the elephant of Bhagdatt, and covered the 
eggs safely. 
After the battle of Mahabharata was over, a sage Shami visited the battlefield. 
There he happened to spot the bell and heard faint chirping coming from 
underneath the bell. The sage removed the bell and discovered four wingless 
chicks beneath it. Surprisingly he said to his disciples- 'Look! Falling of these 
eggs and getting safely covered by the bell simultaneously shows that these 
chicks are no ordinary birds.' Then he instructed his disciples to carry the eggs 
to the hermitage and keep it securely at a place safe from predators. The 
disciples did as told. 
BIRDS MIGRATE TO VINDHYACHAL  

524 
 



Sage Shami thereafter began to foster the chicks in his hermitage. With time, 
the chicks grew feathers and began to fly here and there. But every time the 
birds went out, they returned to the hermitage by evening. The birds also 
gained Vedic knowledge by hearing the discourses, which sage Shami used to 
give daily to his disciples. 
One day, when sage Shami was preaching his disciples, the birds arrived there 
and said- 'O great sage! You are like our father because you have protected 
us. You are our teacher also because we have gained knowledge from you. 
Now we have grown up, kindly tell us what should we do?'. 
The birds speaking like learned people amazed the sage as well as his disciple. 
He asked the birds- 'Tell us, how did you speak so clearly and is there any 
curse behind your present condition?'. The birds replied- 'O sage! Long ago, 
there used to live a sage, Vipulasvan. 
He had two sons- Sukrish and Tumbaru. In our previous birth, we were the 
sons of Sukrish. 
When our father and uncle performed Yagya, we brought them all the 
required materials. One day, Indra arrived at our hermitage disguised as an 
aged bird. The aged bird was starving, hence we requested our father to 
provide him with some food. Upon enquiring by our father, the bird expressed 
his desire to eat human flesh. Our father tried to dissuade the bird but it did 
not give up its insistence. Then our father called us and said that he had 
promised the bird to feed it with human flesh. So, we were asked to donate 
our body in order to satisfy the bird's hunger. But being frightened, we 
expressed our inability to meet the demand of the starving bird. This 
infuriated our father for we were violating his promise that he had made to 
the bird. He then cursed us to take birth as birds in our next life and himself 
got ready to donate his body. As our father was breathing his last, Indra 
resumed his real self and said- 'O great sage! I took this guise only to test your 
character. Kindly forgive me and tell me what you desire now?' Indra blessed 
our father to have divine knowledge and penance free from all obstacles. 

525 
 



Thereafter we also fell at our father's feet and begged for his pardon. We 
requested him to take back his words but he said that his words would not go 
futile. But still he blessed us to have supreme knowledge even in the form of 
birds.' Concluding their talk, the birds said- 'O lord! Thus controlled by destiny, 
our father cursed us. 
After sometime, we took birth in bird form in the battlefield where you found 
us and fostered us in your hermitage. Now we are strong enough to fly long 
distances. So kindly free us from your obligation.' Hearing the words of the 
birds, sage Shami said to his disciples- 'Look! I had already told you that these 
birds were no ordinary creatures. They even survived the battle of 
Mahabharata. It shows their greatness.' Then sage Shami granted them 
permission to migrate to the Vindhyachal. The birds decided to pass their time 
by studying the Vedas and doing penance as long as they stayed there. 
DIVINE PLAYS OF GOD  
Sage Jaimini reached Vindhyachal and arrived before the birds as per 
Markandeya's instructions. 
He said- 'O birds! I am Jaimini, the disciple of Veda Vyasa. I have come here 
with a desire to have your glimpse.' The birds welcomed him saying- 'It is our 
great fortune that you have arrived here. Your arrival has made us feel as if 
God himself has arrived.' Jaimini said- 'O learned birds! Kindly listen to the 
purpose of my visit. Sage Markandeya instructed me to come here and see 
you. You kindly answer my questions that I have in the context of 
Mahabharata.' The birds assured him of every possible explanation as per 
their knowledge. Sage Jaimini proceeded- 'Why did Lord take human 
incarnation even though He is the cause of the origin, perpetuation and 
destruction of the universe? How did Draupadi come to be the queen of five 
Pandavas? How did Balarama expiate for the sin of killing a Brahmin? How 
were Draupadi's sons attain martyrdom? Kindly narrate all these things in 
detail.' The birds say- 'The omnipotent, omniscient and the omnipresent 
Almighty God is worshipped even by the deities. We salute that Lord Vishnu 
who is the originator of this universe and who pervades everywhere. We 

526 
 



salute Brahma from whose four mouths, the Vedas appeared and sanctified all 
the three worlds. We bow down at the feet of Mahadeva. Those sages who 
have metaphysical knowledge assert that Narayan exists in four forms, which 
are both tangible and intangible. His first form is Vasudev, appearance of who 
is more imaginative in nature. This form exists everywhere and in every ages. 
The second form of Narayan is the one that bears the earth on his head. This 
form of God is known as Shesh. Being Tamasi in nature, this form has taken a 
serpent incarnation. The third form of God exhibits his divine power and plays. 
It fosters all the creatures, protects religion, and is known as Pradyumna. Yet 
another form of God known as Aniruddh rests on the serpent's bed in the 
abysmal depth of water. It carries out the task of creation. The third form of 
God destroys the irreligious demons. In the past, this same form rescued the 
earth from the abyss in the incarnation of a boar (Varaha avatar) and killed 
the demon King Hiranyakashipu in the form of Narsimha (lion face with 
human body). This same form of God has appeared now in Lord Krishna's 
incarnation. 
DRAUPADI'S FIVE HUSBANDS  
The birds say- 'Frightened by the severe penance of TRishira, Indra killed him 
to protect his authority and power. But the sin of killing a Brahmin took away 
Indra's radiance. TRishira was the son of Twashta. 
Twashta became furious at his son's death. He plucked one strand of hair from 
his hair-lock and offered it in the sacrificial fire. This resulted into the creation 
of a formidable and strong demon named Vritrasur. 
This demon was created with the objective of killing Indra. 
Learning about the birth of Vritrasur, Indra sent SaptaRishis as emissaries to 
work out a pact with the demon. The SaptaRishis effected a friendship 
between Indra and Vritrasur. But Indra had other ideas. He took Vritrasur by 
surprise and killed him. This deceitful action of Indra further enraged the clans 
of the demons. Soon the atrocities of the demons increased to unbearable 

527 
 



limits. Even Prithvi felt unable to bear the burden of their atrocities. She 
approached the deities and requested them to get her rid of the burden. 
Thus, to relieve Prithvi of her burden, the deities began to take incarnation on 
earth. Dharma and Vayu implanted Indra's radiance in the womb of Kunti. This 
resulted in the birth of Yudhisthira and Bhima. Then Indra himself produced 
Arjuna from Kunti. Nakul and Sahadev were born because of Indra's radiance 
implanted by Ashwini kumars in the womb of Madri. Thus all the five 
Pandavas originated from the same source even though they appeared as 
distinct entities, whereas Draupadi was none other than Shuchi, the wife of 
Indra, produced from the altar in Drupad's palace. In human incarnation, 
Draupadi got five Pandavas as her husband. 
EXPIATION OF BALARAMA  
Sri Krishna's brother Balarama had remained impartial in the battle of 
Mahabharata. Instead of championing the cause either for the Pandavas or for 
the Kauravas, he had preferred to go on a pilgrimage. His wife Revati also 
accompanied him on this pilgrimage.  
Once while travelling, Balarama drank toddy and entered a beautiful garden 
known as Raivat. Taking a stroll, Balarama and Revati then reached a hut. 
In the hut, many Brahmins were sitting and listening to Suta's oration. When 
the Brahmins saw Balarama, they stood up and felicitated him. Only Suta did 
not stand up. Balarama felt insulted and at once killed him. When Balarama 
regained his composure after the intoxication receded, he felt guilty for his 
deed. His belief that killing of Suta would enable him to attain a place in 
Brahma loka proved to be based on false notion as the Brahmins had shunned 
him for his deed. 
After Balarama realised his folly, he began to curse himself and resolved to 
observe a twelveyear long fast in order to expiate for his sin. Thereafter, 
Balarama migrated to a place of pilgrimage known as Pratiloma Saraswati to 
carry out his expiation.  
KILLING OF DRAUPADI'S SONS  

528 
 



In Treta Yuga, there was a king named Harishchandra.  
Once he was hunting in the Mahabahu forest when suddenly, he heard loud 
cries of a woman- 'Save me! Save me!' It was followed by the cries of many 
women. Hearing those cries, King Harishchandra shouted loudly- 'Don't be 
afraid' and dashed in the direction of the cries. The cries however were an 
illusion created by Vighnaraj, the Lord of the obstacles. At that time when King 
Harishchandra heard those cries, sage Vishwamitra was observing severe 
penance in the forest. In order to test Harishchandra's virtuosity, Vighnaraj 
entered his body. As soon as Vighnaraj entered Harishchandra's body, 
Harishchandra lost his temper and began to abuse Vishwamitra, which 
enraged him. His anger destroyed all the knowledge, he had acquired due to 
his severe penance. Seeing the angry Vishwamitra, King Harishchandra began 
to shiver. With folded hands, he begged Vishwamitra's pardon. He said- 'O 
great sage! It is my duty to protect the subjects. Kindly forgive me. Your wrath 
could greatly affect the performance of my duties as a king. Vishwamitra said- 
'O king! If you are a true follower of religion, tell me, who should be given a 
donation? Who should be protected and who should be fought with?' 
Harishchandra answered- 'O great penancer! Donations should be made only 
to such a Brahmin who indulges in fast and religious actions. 
Protection should be extended to those who are afraid and battle should be 
fought with enemies.' Vishwamitra said- 'If you are a religious king, give me 
Dakshaina (donation) as I am a Brahmin seeking salvation.' Harishchandra 
said- 'Tell me your desire. I am ready to grant it. Vishwamitra said- 'O king! 
Just presume that I have received whatever you would donate me. Now, give 
me Dakshaina for the Rajsuya Yagya.' Harishchandra said- 'Ask me whatever 
you wish to have as the Dakshaina of Rajsuya Yagya.' Vishwamitra said- 'O 
king! Give me all you have except your own body, your wife and child.' Feeling 
pleased, King Harishchandra granted what Vishwamitra desired. Vishwamitra 
said- 'O king! Tell me, who is the Lord of your kingdom?' Harishchandra said- 
'Since the moment I have presented this kingdom to you, you are its master.' 
Vishwamitra said- 'If I am the master of this kingdom, what are you doing 

529 
 



here? Leave at once! But before leaving, remove all your clothes, ornaments 
and other royal insignia and go out wearing tree's bark only.' Thus after losing 
his kingdom, King Harishchandra got ready to leave with his wife Shaivya and 
son Rohit. Vishwamitra then intercepted him and said- 'Where are you going 
without paying a Dakshaina for Rajsuya Yagya. Harishchandra said- 'O lord! I 
have donated my whole kingdom. 
Now only our bodies remain with us. What can I give you now?' Vishwamitra 
said- 'You cannot leave without paying a Dakshaina because you have 
promised me.' Harishchandra said- 'Don't be angry, O Brahmin! I have nothing 
at present in my position but I will definitely pay you your Dakshaina in due 
time.' Vishwamitra said angrily- 'Specify the time period within which you will 
give me my Dakshaina or else be ready to get cursed by me.' Harishchandra 
said- 'I will pay the Dakshaina within a month.' Thereafter, Harishchandra 
started to live in seclusion with his wife and children. Seeing the king's pitiable 
condition, his entire subjects began to follow him. Seeing their condition, 
Harishchandra halted and took a look on his subjects. At the same time, sage 
Vishwamitra also arrived there and began to curse Harishchandra for having 
attachment towards his subjects. Hearing the harsh words of Vishwamitra, 
Harishchandra left the kingdom with his wife Shaivya and son Rohit. To drive 
the king away as soon as possible, Vishwamitra began to beat the queen's 
back with a stick. 
Vishwamitra's abhorrent action enraged the five guardian deities of the 
directions and they condemned him. Enraged Vishwamitra cursed them- 'O 
sinners! Go and take birth as human beings.' This curse of Vishwamitra 
frightened the deities. They begged his pardon. Pleased by their prayers, 
Vishwamitra said- 'My words cannot be undone. But despite having 
incarnation of human beings, you will remain bachelors throughout your life. 
You will never feel attachment and allurement for anybody.' Thus due to 
Vishwamitra's curse, those five guardian deities took birth as the five sons of 
Draupadi. Dronacharya's son, Ashwatthama, ultimately killed them. 
KING HARISHCHANDRA  

530 
 



After being thrown out from his kingdom by Vishwamitra, Harishchandra 
reached the holy town of Varanasi, which was an abode of Lord Mahadeva. 
There Harishchandra saw Vishwamitra standing before him. Vishwamitra said- 
'A month has been completed now. Now, give me my Dakshaina.' 
Harishchandra said- 'There is still half an hour in the completion of this month. 
Please wait. I will give your Dakshaina.' Vishwamitra said- 'I will come after 
half an hour.' Saying this, Vishwamitra departed. 
When Vishwamitra left, Harishchandra started to worry as to what would 
happen to him in his next birth if he did not keep his promise made to a 
Brahmin. Seeing him perplexed, queen Shaivya tried to console him. She said- 
'Man requires a wife only to produce a child. Now we already have a child- 
Rohit. Hence I am no longer useful for you. You sell me and pay the acquired 
wealth as Dakshaina to the Brahmin.' Harishchandra fainted after hearing his 
wife's words. The queen began to wail at her husband's condition. Thus 
wailing, the queen also fell unconscious. The little Rohit also felt perplexed by 
his parent's condition. He began to cry- 'O father! O mother! I am hungry. Give 
me food.' At the same time, Vishwamitra arrived there in the guise of Kal. 
After sprinkling water on Harishchandra's face, he made him conscious and 
said- 'O king! Get up and pay my Dakshaina. Your sorrows will increase if you 
do not fulfil your promise.' Harishchandra was regaining his consciousness 
slowly but seeing Vishwamitra he fainted once again. This further enraged 
Vishwamitra. He said- 'O king! If you have even slightest of respect for 
Dharma, give my Dakshaina at once. I will wait till evening and curse you if you 
fail to pay my Dakshaina.' Saying this Vishwamitra departed. The fear of the 
curse began to terrorise Harishchandra. Meanwhile the queen also regained 
consciousness. She once again insisted to sell her in order to pay the 
Dakshaina. This time, Harishchandra accepted her proposal and took the 
queen to the township. There addressing the crowd, he said- 'O dear citizens, 
kindly listen to me. 
I am selling my wife who is dearer to me than my own life. Anybody interested 
in buying her, please do so before evening.' An old Brahmin stepped forward 

531 
 



from the crowd and said- 'I will buy her.' Hearing his words, Harishchandra 
became extremely sad that he could not even utter a word. The Brahmin then 
stuffed the money in the bark clothes of Harishchandra and began to drag the 
queen by her hair. The boy Rohit began to cry holding the hem of her mother. 
Seeing the condition of her son, the queen requested the Brahmin- 'O Arya! 
Kindly let me see the face of my child for once.' Then the queen turned 
towards Rohit and said- 'O son! Your mother is no longer free now. She has 
become a slave. Do not touch me because I have become an untouchable.' 
Then the old Brahmin began to forcibly drag the queen with him. Rohit also 
followed them crying loudly for his mother. The old Brahmin angrily kicked 
him. But still the boy did not give up following them. At last, the queen 
requested the Brahmin- 'O lord! I will not be able to serve you without my 
son. So kindly buy him also.' Hearing the words of the queen, the Brahmin 
once again stuffed some more money in the clothes of Harishchandra and tied 
the boy with the queen and began to drag both of them. Meanwhile 
Vishwamitra also appeared there and demanded the Dakshaina. 
Harishchandra gave him all the money he had got from selling his wife and 
son. 
Seeing that amount of money, Vishwamitra boiled with anger and said- 'O 
wretched among the Kshatriyas! You call this small amount of money as 
Dakshaina! Now look at the powers of my penance.' Harishchandra trembled 
with fear and said- 'O lord! Please wait a little more.' Vishwamitra said- 'Now 
only, a quarter of the day remains. I will wait only for this period and not 
more.' Saying this, Vishwamitra went away. With stooped face, Harishchandra 
once again said addressing the crowd- 'Now I am available for sale. Whoever 
wishes to buy me, please come forward before sunset.' Dharma in the guise of 
a Chandala stepped forward from the crowd. He had a huge stinking body. He 
said- 'I will buy you.' Harishchandra asked- 'Who are you?' The Chandala said- 
'I am a Chandala. My name is Praveer and I am the resident of this very town.' 
Harishchandra thought- 'It is better to accept the curse than accepting the 
slavery of a Chandala.' At the same time, Vishwamitra also arrived there and 
said angrily- 'This Chandala is ready to pay you a lot of money. Why don't you 

532 
 



then pay my Dakshaina?' Harishchandra said- 'O lord! I am born in Suryavansh. 
Accepting the slavery of a Chandala causes great pain for me. I have no money 
now. Since now onwards, I will be your slave and do whatever you will ask me 
to do.' Vishwamitra said- 'If you are my slave and ready to obey me, then I sell 
you to this Chandala for 1000 gold coins. Go and become his slave.' The 
Chandala then presented many villages that were spread over an area of 100 
Yojans to Vishwamitra and tying Harishchandra with a rope dragged him to his 
town. 
In the Chandala's house, Harishchandra contemplated- 'The queen must be 
thinking that I would soon get her freed from the slavery of the old Brahmin 
after paying his dues. But she does not know that I myself have become the 
slave of a Chandala.' After a few days, the Chandala appointed Harishchandra 
as the supervisor of the cremation place and instructed him to be there 
present all the time and to cremate each dead body only after thorough 
investigation. He also instructed him to collect the toll for cremating every 
dead body and divide it in such a way that one sixth part of the toll goes to the 
king and from the remaining five parts, three parts should be reserved for him 
he should take only the remaining two parts as his remuneration. Since that 
day, Harishchandra began to live in the cremation ground. He always 
remembered the glorious days of his kingdom, his queen and his son. He had 
great regret that just because of the anger of Vishwamitra, he lost everything. 
Very soon, his new found occupation began to show on his appearance. His 
hair grew long and was unkempt, his body dry and stinking. In this guise, he 
began to roam in the cremation ground always carrying a stick in his hand. His 
whole day passed in the assessment of the cremation toll and its division 
among the various claimants. He had lost his mental stature as he even forgot 
the count of the days and could not distinguish between the day and night. 
One day, a snake bit Rohit as a result of which, he died. Shaivya brought Rohit, 
crying and wailing to the cremation ground. Even in the unkempt guise, she 
recognised Harishchandra. 

533 
 



Hearing her wailing, Harishchandra went near her expecting to get the clothes 
of the deceased. 
There he saw a woman carrying a dead boy wrapped in a black cloth. He could 
not recognise queen Shaivya but the royal appearance of the boy forced him 
to think- 'To which royal family did this unfortunate boy belong to? How 
pitiable, the cruel Kal did not even spare this boy. My son Rohit would have 
attained the same age by now.' His silence further hurt the queen who said- 'O 
lord! O king! How come, you have been living here without caring for your 
wife and son? We have already lost our kingdom. Now, we have lost our son 
also. O destiny! Did you not destroy everything of Harishchandra?' 
Harishchandra began to think who that woman could be and who that dead 
boy was? 'Isn't she my wife?' Thus recognising his wife and dead son, 
Harishchandra began to cry loudly and fainted. The queen after seeing her 
husband's condition fainted too. After sometime both of them regained their 
consciousness. Then the king took the dead boy in his lap and once again 
fainted. Queen Shaivya began to wonder why Harishchandra was staying in 
the cremation ground. For a moment, she forgot her sorrow and began to 
look at her fainted husband. Then she noticed the stick in Harishchandra's 
hand. Usually Chandalas used to carry that kind of stick. She became dejected 
with the thought that she had become the wife of a Chandala. She then began 
to curse the destiny and began to wail embracing King Harishchandra and 
said- 'O king! I don't know whether I am dreaming or it is a reality. I have lost 
the power of thinking.' Hearing the words of the queen, the king opened his 
eyes and narrated the whole events that led to his becoming a Chandala. Then 
the queen narrated her experiences and how their son Rohit died because of 
snakebite. Harishchandra fell on the ground and began to hug his dead son. 
He was wailing- 'How unfortunate I am that even my wishes are not under my 
control. Without the permission of the Chandala, I cannot even commit self-
immolation. But now, I will not differentiate between the sin and virtuosity. I 
will destroy my body in the pyre of my son.' The queen said- 'O king! I am also 
unable to bear the burden of sorrows. I will also commit immolation with you. 
Then all three of us will stay unitedly in the heaven. It won't matter to us even 

534 
 



if we suffer the tortures of hell.' Then the king arranged a huge pyre and put 
his dead son on it. With the queen, he began to pray to God. Just then all the 
deities arrived there led by Dharma. 
Sage Vishwamitra also accompanied them. They praised Harishchandra. Then 
Dharma, Indra and Vishwamitra came closer to the king. 
Dharma said- 'O king! You have satisfied me with your merits like patience, 
endurance, truthfulness etc.' Indra said- 'Harishchandra, you are very 
fortunate. You have won our hearts along with your wife and son. You have 
even won the heaven with your action. I invite you to stay in heaven along 
with your wife and son.' Then Indra sprinkled ambrosia on the dead Rohit. 
Rohit got up and sat up in no time. Harishchandra, his wife and son Rohit were 
clad in divine clothes and garlands. Indra invited them to stay in the heaven 
forever but Harishchandra said- 'O king of the deities! Without the permission 
of this Chandala, I cannot go anywhere. 
'Dharma said- 'O king! I had learnt in advance about the miseries you would 
suffer in future. 
That's why I took the guise of a Chandala and showed you all the grotesque 
action.' Indra once again invited them to heaven but once again, 
Harishchandra refused saying that in Koshal, people must have been living 
mournfully in his absence. 'I cannot leave them in that pitiable condition to 
enjoy the comforts of the heaven', said Harishchandra. Then, Indra, Dharma 
and Vishwamitra led Harishchandra to Ayodhya, the capital of Koshal. There 
they carried out the coronation of Rohit. Thereafter, they took Harishchandra 
and his queen Shaivya to the heaven. 
THE STORK AND THE PARTRIDGE  
The birds say- O great sage Jaimini! When, King Harishchandra attained his 
heavenly abode, their family priest, sage Vashishta re-emerged from water. 
He came to know about the entire development. He was angry at 
Vishwamitra's stubbornness. He at once cursed Vishwamitra to become a 
stork. 

535 
 



On the other hand Vishwamitra cursed Vashishta to become a partridge. Thus 
both of them turned into birds and began to fight. Their fight caused great 
panic all around. At last accompanied by the deities, Brahma himself arrived at 
the scene and dissuaded the birds from fighting. But Brahma could not 
convince them and they continued to fight. 
Brahma then destroyed their avian appearances and both the sages regained 
their original form. 
Their enemity too ended at the same time. Brahma explained to them that 
Vishwamitra had not done any harm to Harishchandra. In fact he had 
felicitated Harishchandra's ascend to the heaven. 
Both the sages felt ashamed and they embraced each other before leaving for 
their respective hermitages. 
The birds say- O great sage Jaimini! When, King Harishchandra attained his 
heavenly abode, their family priest, sage Vashishta re-emerged from water. 
He came to know about the entire development. He was angry at 
Vishwamitra's stubbornness. He at once cursed Vishwamitra to become a 
stork. 
On the other hand Vishwamitra cursed Vashishta to become a partridge. Thus 
both of them turned into birds and began to fight. Their fight caused great 
panic all around. At last accompanied by the deities, Brahma himself arrived at 
the scene and dissuaded the birds from fighting. But Brahma could not 
convince them and they continued to fight. 
Brahma then destroyed their avian appearances and both the sages regained 
their original form. 
Their enemity too ended at the same time. Brahma explained to them that 
Vishwamitra had not done any harm to Harishchandra. In fact he had 
felicitated Harishchandra's ascend to the heaven. 
Both the sages felt ashamed and they embraced each other before leaving for 
their respective hermitages. 

536 
 



BIRTH OF LIVING CREATURES  
Jaimini says- O great birds, how does a living being take birth? How does it 
grow in the womb bearing all the pain? How does it grow after taking birth? 
What happens to the soul after death? How does it experience the fruits of his 
Karmas? The greatest surprise is how does a little foetus survive in the womb. 
Kindly clear all these doubts. Birds say-  
Once upon a time, a Brahmin lived along with his son- Sumati. One day, the 
Brahmin instructed Sumati to study Vedas under the tutelage of a teacher and 
himself went to the forest to attain Brahmagyan- the knowledge which frees 
the soul from transmigration. But due to his laziness, Sumati did not pay heed 
to his father. When his father repeated his instruction, he simply laughed and 
said- 'O father! I know everything. I have studied all the Vedas in my various 
births. I have experienced the darkness of mother's belly for many times. I 
have suffered thousand kinds of diseases in my previous lives. I have 
experienced the authority as well as slavery in my previous births. I had killed 
as well as got killed by others. Hence, I feel, I have all the knowledge and I am 
sure that I will definitely attain Brahmapad.' Sumati's father was pleased at his 
son's claims and asked him how he attained such virtuosity. 
Sumati said- 'O father! I was a Brahmin in my previous birth. I had attained the 
designation of Acharya. After sometime, I became a recluse. I was blessed 
with an extraordinary memory, which I retained even after my death. This is 
the reason why I remember the self knowledge attained in my previous birth. 
With the support of this knowledge and religious virtues, I will attempt to 
attain salvation. Tell me what you expect from me. I will try to fulfil your 
expectations.' The Brahmin then asked many questions related to life and 
death. Sumati explained those queries thus: Those who never tell a lie, who 
have faith and devotion, only such people die peacefully. 
Whoever's mind is free from the evils like Kama, Krodh, Moha, Dwesh etc. 
(lust, anger, affection, jealousy etc.) and who are altruistic in nature and make 
donations liberally die in peace. Those who lack these virtues suffer great pain 
at the time of death. As soon as such people sight Yamadoot they begin to cry 

537 
 



and call their relatives. But their relatives do not understand their calls. Then 
the dying person turns away his eyes and grasps for breath. He feels great 
pain when his soul leaves his body. Even after death, sufferings of such people 
do not end. They have to undergo scores of tortures in hell. Those who donate 
umbrella, shoes, clothes and cereals attain heaven. The sinners on the other 
hand pass through different hells and take birth as inferior creature in their 
next lives. After continuous transmigration through lower life forms, these 
sinners once again take birth as human beings but are imperfect. They remain 
dwarf, hunched or have any other deformity. Then they pass through all the 
four castes- Shudra, Vaishya, Kshatriya and Brahmin classes. As their action 
improves, they might even attain the position of Indra.'  
 
DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERENT HELLS  
INTRODUCTION  
The Brahmin says- O son! Describe in detail about hell. 
Sumati says- O father! Yamadoots carry and lynch those people who eat 
inedible things, who deceive and dishonor their friends, who indulge in illicit 
relationships, who desert their wife, and who destroy public properties like 
garden, water sources etc. Yamadoots tie hands and legs of such people and 
throw them into the fire. On their way to hell, such people are bitten by 
crows, storks, wolves, vultures etc. They stay in the inferno for thousand 
years. 
Then they are shifted to another hell named Tama, which is always shrouded 
in darkness. 
Sinners who kill the cows and their brothers are thrown into this hell. They 
panic due to darkness and extreme cold. They get nothing to eat and drink. 
Moreover, chilling winds aggravates their miseries by making their bones stiff. 
These sinners then drink their own blood and eat their own flesh. They stay 
there until all their sins have been attenuated completely. 

538 
 



Then they are thrown into yet another hell named Nikrintan, which revolves 
like the wheel of a potter. Hoisting the sinners on the wheel, Yamadoots cut 
their organs but still their sufferings do not end because the cut organs rejoin 
and get cut repeatedly. This continues for thousand of years. Then the sinners 
are put in Aprathisth hell where they experience unbearable sorrow and 
miseries. The sinners are then put in Chakrasankar hell where they are 
tormented with wheels and huge bells. They are disembowelled and their 
eyes are also pricked. The sinners have to pass through different hells namely 
Asipatra, Taptakumbha and Lohakumbha. 
YAMADOOT AND THE KING OF VIDEHA  
Sumati says- I was born in a Vaishya family, seven births before this present 
one. In that birth, I once prevented cows from drinking water. As a result of 
this sin, I was thrown in the hell named Darun where I spent one hundred 
years without a drop of water. 
Suddenly one day, cool pleasant wind began to blow, its cool touch gave some 
relief to me. I saw that a Yamadoot was guiding a gentle looking man. Besides 
me, all the inmates of the hell felt extreme joy by the sight of that gentleman. 
The gentleman was asking that Yamadoot as to why he was being taken to the 
hell. From the words of that gentleman, it appeared that he was a renowned 
scholar. That man was in fact the ruler of a kingdom named Videha and was 
popular as the fosterer of his subjects. 
DESCRIPTION OF TORTURES IN HELL 
 Thus asked by the gentleman, Yamadoots replied politely- 'O king! You once 
deliberately prevented your wife Pivari from conceiving because you were 
more attracted to your second wife- Sushobhana. It is because of that action 
that you have been brought here to undergo severe torture.' The religious 
minded king said- ' I am willing to go where ever you want to take me, but 
before doing that I would like to have answers to my questions. I see many 
people undergoing severe tortures in this hell. Big and frightening crows prick 
their eyes. Tell me, for what sin they are facing such tortures.' Yamadoot said- 

539 
 



'O king! Humans suffer or enjoy according to their Karmas. The effect of their 
Karmas diminishes in proportion to their sufferings. These crows are pricking 
the eyes of such people who had seduced other women and deceitfully 
acquired others' wealth. These people will suffer for the same number of 
years as their eyes blinked during the leering. These crows prick the tongues 
of those people who had criticised Vedas, deities, Brahmins and teachers. 
Those who caused differences between friends, husband-wives, father and 
sons and relatives, or killed the performer of the Yagyas are suffering under 
the saw. Those who insulted their parents and teachers have been thrown in 
the pit of pus, faeces and other excretions with their head down. 
Those who had food before offering it to the deities, guests, servants, father 
and elders, fire and birds, stay in a pit of pus. Iron nails are hammered into the 
ears of those people who gleefully heard the criticism of creatures, deities, 
Brahmins and Vedas. Those who remarried their daughters to another person 
despite her former husband being alive are cut into pieces and thrown into a 
saline river. Those who betrayed their friends are tied tightly with a rope. 
Worms, scorpion, crows and owls then bite their bodies. Those who enjoyed 
carnal intimacy during daytime or had illicit relations with women are 
hammered with nails to a prickly Bombax tree. 
Those who insulted Vedas and fire are thrown from the lofty peaks of 
mountain. O king! Those who steal gold, those who kill Brahmin, those who 
drink wine and those who rape the wife of their teacher are burnt in fire.' 
Attenuation Of Sins Yamadoot says- As a result of accepting money from a 
degraded person, a Brahmin takes birth as an ass. A Brahmin who carries out 
Yagya for a degraded person takes birth as worm after undergoing severe 
sufferings in different types of hell. A person takes birth as an ass or an 
inferior bird as a result of abusing his parents. A person who does not worship 
his tutelary God before eating takes birth as a monkey. Traitors take birth as 
fish. Those who steal cereals take birth as mice. A Shudra, who manages to 
establish intimacy with a Brahmin woman, takes birth as a worm. Similarly, 
killers of woman and children also take birth as worms. Ungrateful people 

540 
 



take birth as worm, insects, grasshoppers, scorpion, crows etc. Encroacher of 
land takes birth as grass shrubs, creepers and inferior trees. Butchers who kill 
bulls take birth as eunuchs. Thus a person has to face the result of his Karma 
according to the gravity of his sins. 
Sumati says- As Yamadoot began to push the king ahead, all the creatures in 
hell gave a loud cry- 'O king! Please stay here for few more moments. The 
wind that blows towards us after touching your body gives us immense joy. 
This wind has ended our sufferings and pains. Have pity on us.' The king asked 
the Yamadoot- 'Why are these people so joyous by my presence? Yamadoot 
said- 'O king! Initially, you used to sustain your body by the leftovers of the 
deities, ancestors, guests and ascetics. This is the reason why the wind that 
blows touching your body causing such pleasure to these people. 
'The king said- 'If I can eliminate the sufferings of these sinners merely by 
standing here, I will definitely stay here.' Yamadoot said- 'No, you cannot stay 
here. It is a place for the sinners only. 
Come with us. You will have to enjoy the pleasure of your pious action.' The 
king said- 'No, I will not go anywhere leaving these poor people in this pitiable 
condition.' Yamadoot said- 'O king! Look, Dharma and Indra have themselves 
arrived to escort you to the heaven. 
'Dharma said- 'O king! You have worshipped me. Hence follow me to the 
heaven.' The king replied- 'No, I will not go anywhere leaving these thousands 
of people in the hell.' Indra said- 'Everyone has to taste the fruits of his 
Karmas. You cannot help them.' The king said- 'O Indra! Tell me, how virtuous 
was I in my previous life?' Dharma said- ' Though your pious actions are 
fathomless, be sure that their significance are not much than drops of water in 
an ocean, the stars in the sky. The kindness you have shown towards these 
sinners has further enhanced your virtuosity.' The king said- 'If it is so, may all 
these people be released from their sufferings by the virtue of my good 
Karmas.' Indra said- 'O king! By your words, your pious action has increased 
like the height of the mountain and these sinners have also been released 
from their sufferings.'  

541 
 



 
FAMOUS MYTHOLOGICAL CHARACTERS 
BEING CHASTE AND BIRTH OF DURVASA, DATTATREYA, CHANDRAMA  
Brahmin says- O son! Tell me, what should I do now? Sumati says- Now, you 
should become a Vanprasthi and lead a life of a Bhikshu by having control 
over your senses. You will attain that rare Yoga, which helps a man to unite 
with the almighty after freeing him from the cycles of birth, death and rebirth. 
Brahmin says- O son! Now explain to me about this Yoga, which bestows 
liberation to a man. 
Sumati says- I am now describing to you, the same text related with Yoga that 
was once narrated by Dattatreya to Alarka. 
The Brahmin asked Sumati- Who was Dattatreya's father? How did he acquire 
the knowledge of Yoga? Who was Alarka? Sumati says- In ancient 
Pratisthanpur (modern Paithan) there lived a Brahmin. He was inflicted by 
leprosy because of the sins he had committed in his previous birth. The 
Brahmin was very short-tempered and used to scoff at his wife frequently. But 
his wife was very chaste in character and worshipped him like a deity. One 
day, the Brahmin ordered his wife to carry him to the prostitute's house, as he 
had become too weak and feeble. Being chaste, the wife collected some 
money and began to carry the Brahmin on her shoulders to the home of the 
prostitute. On their way, they reached a place where sage Mandavya was 
hanged but still was alive. In the darkness, the woman could not see the 
things clearly and the Brahmin who was riding her shoulders happened to 
touch the sage. The sage cursed angrily that whoever had touched him would 
die before sunrise. Hearing the words of the sage, the Brahmin's wife 
thundered that there would be no sunrise tomorrow. 
Words of the woman came to be true as next morning, the Sun did not rise. 
Thus the whole world was shrouded in darkness as a result of which, the 
deities became worried. The deities apprehended that without the occurrence 
of sunrise, the whole universe might be destroyed. They were also worried 

542 
 



that without the differentiation of day and night, how could the months be 
calculated and the seasons known. Even the calculation of year would be 
impossible. The chastity of Brahmins wife had forced even the mighty sun to 
eschew its daily routine. As a result of this, religious activities like Havan, 
Yagya etc. also came to a halt. Seeing them perplexed, Brahma advised the 
deities to eulogise Ansuya, the wife of sage Atri. All the deities then pleased 
Ansuya who assured them to convince the wife of the Brahmin to retract her 
words. After that, Ansuya reached the Brahmin's hut and said to his wife- 'O 
fortunate one! May you always serve your husband with full dedication. A 
chaste woman enjoys half the virtues of her husband, which he earns by his 
religious activities.' Brahmini said- 'I am blessed today that the deities have at 
last glanced at me. Now, tell me, what should I do?' Ansuya said- 'O Sadhvi! In 
the absence of the day, all the religious activities have ceased to exist. The 
world is on the verge of extinction. Only your wish can protect the world from 
imminent calamity. Hence, be pleased now and allow the Sun to rise as usual.' 
Brahmini said- 'O fortunate one! Sage Mandavya had cursed that my husband 
would die with sunrise. I cannot afford to lose my husband.' Ansuya said- 
'Don't worry, O chaste woman! I will resurrect your husband. So, kindly allow 
the Sun to rise now.' Then, Ansuya invoked the Sun by offering water as an 
oblation. However, the leper-inflicted Brahmin died as soon as the Sun rose. 
Then by the powers of her penance, Ansuya resurrected the Brahmin and 
transformed him into a disease-free handsome young man. She also blessed 
the couple to live for hundred years. The deities were pleased with Ansuya 
and asked her to seek a boon. Ansuya expressed her desire to give birth to the 
trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh as her sons. The trinity blessed her with 
this boon. In due course of time, Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh took birth as 
Chandrama, Dattatreya and Durvasa from Ansuya. 
DATTATREYA'S PREACHES KARTAVEERYA ARJUNA  
Sumati says- O father! After the demise of Kartaveerya, his ministers and 
priests decided to crown his son Arjuna as their new king. But Arjuna refused 
saying that he would not become the king unless and until he had attained the 

543 
 



status of a Yogi. Sage Garg then advised Arjuna to worship Dattatreya who 
had helped the deities to reunite after the defeat of the demons. 
Afterwards, Arjuna migrated to Dattatreya's hermitage and began to worship 
and serve him. 
Pleased by his penance and service, Dattatreya asked Arjuna to seek a boon. 
Arjuna said- 'O lord! Kindly bless me with such a power, which enables me to 
perform my duties as a king in a just manner. May nobody match me in war 
and may I have one thousand arms. I wish to get killed only by such a person 
who is more virtuous than me and may I guide the people towards the right 
path. May nobody in my kingdom remain poor and may my devotion for your 
lotus feet be eternal.' Dattatreya said- 'O son! All of your wishes shall come 
true. With my blessings, you shall rule over all the four directions.' Then, 
Dattatreya crowned Arjuna as the king. Large number of people witnessed his 
crowning ceremony. Soon after becoming the king, Kartaveerya Arjuna 
ordered that nobody in his kingdom should wield a weapon except him. 
KUVALAYASHVA AND THE HORSE KUVALAYA  
Sumati says- O father! Now listen to the tale of a Brahmin named Alarka. Long 
ago, there lived a king named Shatrujit who had a meritorious son, Ritudhwaj. 
Prince Ritudhwaj had many friends with whom he used to play with. In course 
of time, two sons of Ashwatar, the king of Nagas became his friends in the 
guise of Brahmin boys. Both of them were young and good-looking. 
Both of them used to pass the entire day in the company of Ritudhwaj. They 
would return to their abode in Patal loka only at night. On being enquired by 
their father, they revealed the reason about their late arrival at home. They 
said- 'O father! Up there on the land, there is a prince named Ritudhwaj. He is 
the son of King Shatrujit. He is very handsome, gentle, brave, truthful, 
knowledgeous and meritorious. We enjoy his company.' Ashwatar said- 
'Prince Ritudhwaj is really blessed for even the meritorious people like you 
praise him. But have you done anything to make him happy?' His sons asked- 
'What can we do for his pleasure? We find ourselves incapable of pleasing 

544 
 



such a person whose riches are even rare for Patal loka.' Ashwatar said- 'Even 
then, I wish to hear about the characteristics of your new friend.' The sons 
said- O father!  
Once the prince narrated us a tale, we are going to relate it now. A Brahmin 
named Galav lived in King Shatrujits kingdom. One day, he arrived in the court 
of the king riding on a horse and said- 'O king! For the past many months, a 
wretched demon has been tormenting me and causing severe disturbances in 
my daily rituals. He is capable of taking any guise at will. Disguising as an 
elephant, lion, tiger, wolf and many other wild animals, he terrorises me. It 
has become very difficult for me to do my meditation. One day in my 
frustration, I let out a deep sigh. As soon as I did so, this divine horse 
descended from the sky. I heard a heavenly voice, which said- 'O Brahmin! 
This horse is capable of circumambulating the entire earth without getting 
tired. It can climb lofty mountains effortlessly and can also run in all the three 
worlds with the same speed. Hence, this horse shall be renowned as Kuvalaya. 
Riding it, the son of King Shatrujit will kill the demon that torments you day 
and night. 'O king! That is the reason that I have arrived in your court with this 
horse. Kindly accept it and instruct your son to ride it and kill the demon.' King 
Shatrujit saw his son Ritudhwaj off with the Brahmin riding that divine horse. 
Kuvalaya goes to Patal Loka, killing of demon Patal Ketu and marriage with 
Madalasa Prince Ritudhwaj stayed in the hermitage of sage Galav and helped 
him to perform his Yagyas without any problem by clearing all the minor 
obstacles. The demons were not aware of his arrival in the hermitage. One 
day, a demon arrived in the hermitage disguised as a wild boar and began to 
rub his bushy head against the body of sage Galav. Seeing this, his disciples 
began to scream. Prince Ritudhwaj at once rode the horse and wielding a 
weapon dashed after the boar. The prince injured the boar with an arrow, 
which was sickle-shaped. The demons fled from the scene. Prince Ritudhwaj 
followed the boar everywhere it went on the mountains, in the forests and on 
the riverbank. He was determined to slay the demon that had been disturbing 
the sage for long. 

545 
 



Ultimately, the boar jumped into a pit. Ritudhwaj also followed it but could 
not see the boar anywhere in the pit. Instead he saw a beautiful town which 
could have matched even the abode of Indra. He entered the town where he 
saw an extremely pretty girl who was walking briskly. 
Ritudhwaj tried to know about her destination but she ignored him and 
climbed the stairs of a palace. Ritudhwaj also followed her and in the palace, 
he saw a beautiful girl sitting on a bedstead. As soon as the girl saw him, she 
fainted. Her beauty attracted even Ritudhwaj. He assured her that there was 
nothing to be afraid about. Then the same girl whom Ritudhwaj had sighted 
earlier came there and began to fan the fainted lady. The prince enquired 
about the reason of her unconsciousness. But the girl did not say anything. 
Instead she whispered something in the ears of her friend who then said- 'O 
stranger! This is the daughter of Vishwavasu, the king of Gandharvas. Her 
name is Madalasa. One day, while she was playing in her garden, a demon 
Patalketu abducted her. Since then she stays here in his captivity. On the 
coming thirteenth day of this month that demon will marry her. But he 
doesn't deserve to be her husband. Yesterday, she was ready to commit 
suicide but the cow Surabhi, assured her that a man from the earth would 
come and kill the demon. Only he would be suitable for my friend. I am her 
friend. My name is Kundala. I am the daughter of Vindhyavan and wife of 
Pushkarmali. 
My husband had been killed by the demon Shumbh. Since then I have been 
touring various places of pilgrimage in order to receive salvation. That 
wretched Patalketu had taken the guise of a boar but a brave man has injured 
him with his arrow. I have arrived here only to investigate who is that man. Do 
not worry about my friend's unconsciousness. She has fainted because of your 
infatuating handsomeness. She has begun to love you but her problem is that 
only that man can marry her who has injured the boar. This thought has 
caused her to lose her consciousness. 
Now reveal your identity.' Ritudhwaj said- 'I am the son of King Shatrujit. I 
have been staying in the hermitage of sage Galav to protect the sages. Just a 

546 
 



few days back, a boar arrived in the hermitage and began to torment the 
sages. I have injured that boar with my arrow. Now I have arrived here 
following that boar and happened to see you.' Hearing the words of 
Ritudhwaj, Madalasa felt shy as well as extreme joy. Kundala then said to her 
friend- 'The prince speaks the truth. Words of Surabhi cannot go wrong.' She 
then said to Ritudhwaj- 'O brave man! Doubtlessly you have killed the demon, 
Patalketu. My friend Madalasa is blessed now. Now its your duty to marry my 
friend and take her home as your bride.' Ritudhwaj said- 'How can I marry 
your friend without the permission of my father. I am still not fully 
independent.' Kundala said- 'Please do not say this. My friend is a divine 
beauty. 
Marry her right now.' Prince Ritudhwaj then agreed to marry Madalasa then 
and there. Madalasa happily remembered their family priest Tumbaru who 
arrived there instantaneously. In the presence of sacred fire, Tumbaru carried 
out the rituals of marriage and tied them in nuptial knot. 
Thereafter blessing the newly wed couple, Tumbaru and Kundala took to their 
respective paths. 
On the other hand, when Ritudhwaj and Madalasa started off riding the horse, 
Kuvalaya, demons' army surrounded them. A fierce battle followed. In no 
time, prince Ritudhwaj slayed the entire army and reached his kingdom. There 
he narrated the whole incident to his father Shatrujit. King Shatrujit felt very 
much pleased by the prowess of his son and blessed them heartily. 
Thereafter, Ritudhwaj came to his palace with his wife Madalasa. They then 
began to live happily. 
SEPARATION OF MADALASA  
The newly-wed couple had hardly spent few months together when King 
Shatrujit once again instructed Ritudhwaj to travel across the entire earth and 
see whether the Brahmins were performing their religious duties without any 
obstacles. Ritudhwaj obeyed the dictates of his father. He used to scale vast 
distances for the whole day and returned to his wife only at night. 

547 
 



One day he noticed that a sage was staying at the bank of river Yamuna. He 
was in fact Talketu, the younger brother of Patalketu. But the prince could not 
recognise him. That sage approached Ritudhwaj and requested him to extend 
his protection over his hermitage, as he was about to start Yagyas. He also 
begged for the precious necklace of the prince on the pretext that he had 
nothing to pay as Dakshaina. The gullible prince gave his necklace to the sage. 
Then instructing the prince to guard the hermitage and promising to return 
soon, the sage left. 
In fact, the sage who was actually a demon arrived in the court of King 
Shatrujit. Madalasa was also present in the court. He said- 'Prince Ritudhwaj 
sacrificed his life fighting with the demon while protecting my hermitage. 
Before his death, he gave me his necklace. His horse has been captured by the 
demon. I have brought this necklace to you to inform you about that sad 
incident.' After giving the necklace to Madalasa, the demon returned to the 
hermitage. Hearing the news of her husband's death, Madalasa also gave up 
her life. Mourning soon enveloped the entire palace. Seeing the death of his 
daughter-in-law, Madalasa, King Shatrujit was in a dilemma as for whose 
death should he mourn. A little contemplation led him to the conclusion that 
it would be futile to mourn his son- Ritudhwaj's death because he had died for 
a noble cause. But his daughter-in-law had followed the steps of her husband, 
so her death should be mourned for. The queen also supported the king. 
Thereafter the king performed the last rites of both of them. 
When Talketu returned to his hermitage, he found Ritudhwaj still standing 
alert. In a sweet tone, Talketu said- 'I am obliged by you, O prince! Staying 
here with unwavering mind, you have executed my desired task. I have met 
my objective, so you may go now.' Prince Ritudhwaj then returned to his 
palace riding his horse. 
MADALASA IS REBORN  
When prince Ritudhwaj reached the capital, everyone expressed his pleasure 
with surprise. 

548 
 



Ritudhwaj met everyone happily and went to the palace of his parents. 
Though the king and the queen blessed him but sad expression on their face 
surprised the prince. Upon enquiry, the king related the entire incident and 
also how his wife Madalasa had died. The news of Madalsa's death shocked 
Ritudhwaj. Then consoled by his parents and friends, prince Ritudhwaj carried 
out the necessary consecrations to pacify the soul of his dead wife. He had 
decided never to marry again. 
The sons of the Nag said- 'O father! Now prince Ritudhwaj lives like an ascetic. 
He never casts his eyes on women and only indulges in playing with people of 
his age. Hence all we can do for him is to keep him happy.' Hearing the entire 
tale, Nagraj fell in deep thought. After sometime he said to his sons with a 
laughter- 'O sons! Now I will do such a thing that will bring back the smile of 
Ritudhwaj.' Saying this, Nagraj Ashwatar reached Plakshavataran, a place of 
pilgrimage at the foothills of Himalayas along with his brother Kambal. There 
they began to do severe penance to please Goddess Saraswati. At last, 
Saraswati appeared before them and asked them to seek a boon. 
Ashwatar requested her to bless both of them with a sweet and melodious 
voice. After granting them this boon, Goddess Saraswati disappeared. By her 
blessings, Ashwatar and his brother, Kambal became famous singers. Then 
they began worshipping Lord Shiva singing sweet and melodious hymns. 
Pleased by their prayers, Lord Shankar also asked them to seek a boon. At that 
Ashwatar said- 'O lord! I wish that Ritudhwaj's wife Madalasa takes birth as 
my daughter.' Lord Shankar said- 'With my blessings, your wish shall come 
true. During the Shradha period, you yourself take the middle portion of the 
Pind (food offered to dead ancestors) and contemplating on me, offer 
oblations to your ancestors. Madalasa will emerge from your 'middle-hood'. 
Bowing before Lord Shiva thereafter, both the brothers returned to their 
kingdom in Patal loka. 
Ashwatar organised a Shradha in the same way as told by the Lord and 
consumed the middle portion of the food offered to the ancestors. Then 
contemplating on the desired object, he let out a deep sigh. Instantaneously, 

549 
 



Madalasa emerged from his 'middle-hood'. Ashwatar did not reveal this fact 
to anybody and made adequate arrangements so that she could live in 
secrecy. Thereafter one day, he instructed his sons to bring their friend 
Ritudhwaj to the palace. Both the sons once again joined the company of 
Ritudhwaj. One day while playing, they insisted him to visit their palace. The 
prince gladly accompanied them. In Patal loka, he was amazed to see his 
Brahmin friends getting transformed into serpents. They took Ritudhwaj 
through the streets and lanes of their kingdom. Ultimately they reached the 
palace of Ashwatar. Introducing Ritudhwaj, the serpent princes said- 'O father! 
This is our brave friend, Ritudhwaj.' Ritudhwaj greeted Ashwatar respectfully 
and received his blessings. Ashwatar said to him- 'Long live O prince! My sons 
always sing praise of your divine virtues. I request you to stay with us for a few 
months and enjoy the pleasures of Patal loka.'  
RITUDHWAJ RE-UNITES WITH MADALASA  
Ritudhwaj stayed in the palace of Ashwatar. Nagraj did his best to keep 
Ritudhwaj happy and forget the sorrow of his wife's separation. During his 
stay, Ashwatar tried many times to coax Ritudhwaj into revealing his heartiest 
desire. But every time Ritudhwaj intelligently avoided the topic.  
Once, King Ashwatar, in Ritudhwaj's presence, asked his sons what should be 
done to please him. They informed the king that nothing less than Madalasa 
would please the prince most and that the prince was eager to see his 
deceased wife once more. 
Prince Ritudhwaj also said shyly that he would be greatly obliged if Nagraj 
could help him to have a sight of his deceased wife. Ashwatar said- 'O son! If 
you wish to see the illusion, come on, have a sight of your deceased wife.' 
Saying this, Nagraj called Madalasa who was staying secretly in his palace and 
asked Ritudhwaj- 'Take a good look, O son, if she is your wife.' Seeing his wife 
before him, the prince fainted. When he regained his consciousness, he 
stepped forward to touch her but Ashwatar stopped him cautioning that she 
was not real but illusionary and would vanish as soon as he touched her. 

550 
 



Hearing this, Ritudhwaj once again lost his consciousness. When he regained 
his consciousness, he uttered nothing but 'She's mine! She's mine!' Seeing the 
pitiable condition of the prince, Nagraj revealed the whole story of Madalsa's 
resurrection. Ritudhwaj became extremely joyous after re-uniting with his 
wife. Then he contemplated on his divine horse as a result of which, it 
appeared within a moment. Riding the horse, prince Ritudhwaj returned to his 
kingdom with his wife Madalasa. 
BIRTH OF MADALASA'S SONS  
After returning to his father's kingdom, Ritudhwaj narrated the whole incident 
to his parents of how he regained Madalasa. Then they began to live happily. 
After many years, King Shatrujit crowned Ritudhwaj as the king. After King 
Ritudhwaj's accession to the throne, Madalasa gave birth to her first son. 
Ritudhwaj named the child as Vikrant. After sometime, Madalasa gave birth to 
her second son whom Ritudhwaj named as Subahu. Subsequently, their third 
son was born and named Shatrumardan. After the naming ceremony of the 
third son, Madalasa could not help laughing, as she was very amused by such 
a name given to her son. The metaphysical knowledge, which Madalasa gave 
to her three sons, had helped them to become ascetics. When their fourth son 
was born, the king sought her approval on the name being given to him. This 
made the queen laugh. The king asked her to name the child. Madalasa 
named this child as Alarka. 
Hearing the name, the king ridiculed its relevance. Madalasa said that the 
names have significance only for worldly matters. She also reminded the king 
about the futility of the names given to their previous children. As Madalasa 
began to preach her fourth son about the metaphysics, the king stopped her 
by saying that she had already preached all the three sons on the path of 
renunciation. He requested her to spare the fourth child so that he could grow 
up and become the king one-day. Madalasa then blessed her son- 'You are 
blessed my son because you will rule the earth without obstacles. Now 
cultivate in your heart the desire to do well to others. 

551 
 



Never caste your eyes on women other than your wife. Always contemplate 
on Murari to destroy the evil thoughts in your heart.' PREACHINGS OF 
MADALASA Madalasa used to preach the little prince while played. When 
Alarka attained boyhood, he asked- 'O mother! What should I do in order to 
mastery over physical and metaphysical matters? How can I serve my subjects 
in the best possible way?' Madalasa said- 'Looking after the welfare of the 
subjects religiously is the supreme duty of a king. He should always be alert 
against the activities of his enemies. With the help of spies, the king should 
keep a watch on the activities of his minister so that he could not make 
friends with the enemies. It is unwise for the king to trust everybody but 
under certain circumstances, he may trust even his enemies. A king must 
control his lust but at the same time, he should make efforts to increase the 
boundaries of his kingdom. 
Surrendering to sensual comfort is like death for a king. A king should appear 
as all pervasive and omnipresent. Fostering the subjects with total 
righteousness enhances the wisdom of the king.'  
 
DUTIES OF PEOPLE BELONGING TO VARIOUS ASHRAMAS  
VARNA ASHRAMA DHARMA  
Alarka says- 'Tell me about the duties of the different classes and stages of 
life.' Madalasa says- 'Donation, study and Yagya, these three are the religion 
of a Brahmin. 
Performing Yagya for others, teaching and accepting donation are the three 
vocations of Brahmin. Donation, study and Yagya are also the religious duties 
of Kshatriyas. Protection of land and using weapons are vocation for 
Kshatriyas. Religious duties of a Vaishya are also same like that of the 
Brahmins such as donation, study and Yagya. For a living, Vaishya may take up 
animal rearing, agriculture and trade as profession. Serving all these three 
above mentioned castes as well as making donations and performing Yagya 
are the religious duties of a Shudra. 

552 
 



Tilling the earth, serving Brahmins, feeding animals, selling and purchasing 
items are professions of a Shudra. A person belonging to Dwij class may 
relatively enjoy freedom until his sacred thread ceremony has not been 
performed. After the sacred thread ceremony, he should come to stay at the 
home of his teacher and observe celibacy strictly while studying scriptures. 
There he is expected to serve the Guru sincerely. At the completion of 
education, he should pay Dakshaina to his Guru. He may get married and start 
the second stage of his life that is Grihastha ashrama. He should then 
subsequently opt for Vanprastha and Sanyas respectively. After the 
completion of education and paying all the dues, the disciple is ready to start 
second stage of his life that is Grihastha ashrama. For this he should first find a 
suitable girl from his caste and get married. Grihastha ashrama is considered 
as the best stage of life. It is in itself a complete Yagya. As a householder, he is 
expected to foster those who are dependent on him. 
During this stage of his life, he should earn his livelihood by occupations 
ascribed for his caste. 
He should please the deities by performing Yagyas, his ancestors by making 
oblations, Prajapatis by producing children, spectres by offering sacrifices of 
cereals and society by showering love. 
Even the ascetic and celibates depend on married people for their daily bread. 
Hence married life or Grihastha ashrama is stated to be superior among all the 
ashramas. 
A Grihastha must welcome and treat even his unexpected guests with great 
warmth. A householder who fails to satisfy his guest never succeeds in 
religious matters. The Yagyas that are offered in such households go futile. 
Hence it is not proper for the householder to show ego and abuse a guest 
otherwise he will have to expiate for it later. 
When the children of the householder grow up and his body becomes senile, 
he should go to the forest after relinquishing the world. There, he should pass 
his time by indulging himself in austerities and religious activities. This stage is 

553 
 



known as Vanprastha ashrama and is most necessary for the sanctification of 
his soul. This stage is followed by Sanyas ashrama- the stage, which requires 
complete renunciation, celibacy, control of senses and anger etc. The virtues 
like truthfulness, sanctity, non-violence, tolerance, forgiveness, kindness, 
generosity and contentment are the religious merits applicable to all the 
ashramas equally. Those who abide by their religion stay in the abode of 
Brahma till the reign of fourteen Indras. The king punishes those who violate 
this religious code. If the king doesn't punish them, he is himself destroyed. 
Hence a king must first of all abide by the duties as prescribed for different 
ashramas in his life and only then he has the right to punish those people who 
violate these dictates. '  
DUTIES OF A GRIHASTHA (HOUSEHOLDER)  
Alarka says- What are the duties of a married man by discharging which he 
becomes free from all kinds of bondage and attains salvation. Kindly tell me 
about these things. 
Madalasa says- O son! Those people who discharge their duties as a 
householder by fostering all the living beings attain to the heaven 
automatically. All the living creatures of the world including the deities and 
the dead ancestors are dependent on their nurturing on the householder. 
They always look at the face of the married man for their living. In fact, 
Grihastha ashrama can be compared to a cow that fosters others with her 
milk. All the four Vedas are present in this 'cow' that is Grihastha ashrama. 
Entire universe is reflected in this ashrama. 
Daily after the bath in the morning, a Grihastha must perform oblations to the 
deities, to the sages, Prajapati and ancestors by offering water to them. Then 
he should perform a Yagya and offer cereals in the sacrificial fire. There are 
certain places in the house, which are reserved for specific deities and where 
offerings are made to them. Sacrifice to Brahma should be offered in the 
central part of the home, to Vishwadeva in the eastern side of the home, to 
Dhanvantari in the northern side, to Indra again in the eastern side, to Yama in 

554 
 



the southern side, to Varuna in the western side and to Soma in the northern 
side of the home. At the threshold of the house, sacrifice should be offered to 
Dhata and Vidhata. One must sit facing the south while offering sacrifice to his 
dead ancestors. For the dogs and birds, sacrifices should be given on the 
ground in the morning and evening. At the arrival of a guest, a Grihastha must 
worship him by offering water, cereals, flowers etc. as per his financial 
condition. If possible, a Grihastha should feed one or more Brahmins in order 
to pacify his ancestors. He should give alms to a beggar and a celibate. 
Without giving alms, a Grihastha must not proceed to dine. He should also 
feed starving and diseased people first. Such kind of living definitely benefits a 
Grihastha. 
SHRADHA AND ITS RITUALS REGULAR AND CAUSAL DUTIES  
Madalasa says- O son! A Grihastha has three kinds of duties- regular, causal 
and a combination of both. Rituals, which are connected with oblations and 
carried out daily, are called regular duties. Rituals and consecrations 
performed at the birth of a child are called causal duties. Yearly performance 
of Shradha for the dead ancestors is a combination of regular and causal 
duties. 
Now listen about the causal duties. 
At the time of a child's birth, different kinds of rituals and consecrations are 
carried out in the household. During the time of marriage ceremony also, 
many more rituals are carried out. At the time of marriage however, 
performance of the Shradha named Nandimukh is a must. During the Shradha, 
the host should sit facing the north or the east and offer a loaf made of barley 
flour and yoghurt. Then he should circumambulate around two Brahmins and 
worship them. 
Rituals and Shradha carried out in the household after the occurrence of any 
death in the household comes under the category of causal duties. During the 
Shradha period, all kinds of sacred activities are forbidden. Only the use of 
Kusha grass is permitted. Donation of 'Pind' comprising of barley flour, 

555 
 



yoghurt, honey etc. is made for only one time to pacify the soul of the dead 
person. Then oblation of water with sesame seeds should be offered in the 
name of the dead person. This ritual should continue for a year- once every 
month. After a year, Shradha is organised in which one, three or five Brahmins 
are fed. Thereafter, every year, during the darker phase of Ashwin month, a 
Shradha should be carried out for the dead ancestors. This ritual is a 
combination of regular and causal duties. 
Sages have made provision for appeasement of dead ancestors up to the last 
seven generations. 
Cereals, which the people offer in the name of their dead ancestors, pacify 
those souls who stay in Pishach Yoni. Water falling on the earth at the time of 
wringing the clothes after one's bath pacifies those souls, who have taken the 
form of vegetation after their death. Water falling during the bath satisfies 
those souls who have attained the status of deities. Cereals that fall during the 
lifting of Pind satisfy those souls who are in lower life forms. The cereals that 
scatter here and there and swept aside satisfy souls of those people, who had 
died in their childhood before the accomplishment of any consecration. The 
waste water falling down while Brahmin washes his hands after dining and 
pacifies all the other souls. 
Every month, during the waning phase of the Moon or on the day of 
Amavasya, Shradha should be carried out. Besides it, eighth day of darker 
phase in the month of Paush is also good for carrying out Shradha. If a 
virtuous Brahmin is available, time of solar and lunar eclipses is also good for 
Shradha. The time when the Sun crosses the equator during its northward and 
southward journey is also good for Shradha. Apart from these above 
mentioned situations, one can also organise Shradha in the following 
circumstances- at the time of great calamity, availability of items suitable for 
Shradha, after a nightmare, during the period of birth Nakshatra and during 
the period of unfavourable stars etc. On the first day of the Shradha, a 
virtuous Brahmin should be invited while the host must observe total 
restraint. It is said that such a man, who indulges in sexual intercourse on the 

556 
 



same day after carrying out Shradha or eating food of Shradha, causes his 
dead ancestors to sleep in semen for one month. Ancestors of such a man, 
who performs Shradha immediately after having a sexual intercourse, drink 
urine and semen for one month. Hence a virtuous Brahmin, whom the host is 
intending to feed, should be informed about the Shradha one day earlier in 
advance. If a Brahmin is not available, a true celibate can be fed on the day of 
Shradha. 
After the Brahmin has carried out all the necessary rituals, Havan, oblation 
etc., he must be formally insisted to dine. All kinds of edible items that a 
Brahmin may wish to eat should be offered. While reciting the Rakshodhn 
mantra, grains of sesame and mustard should be scattered on the ground. 
After the Brahmin has dined, he should be offered with water to wash his 
hands and some cereals that should be scattered on the ground with his 
permission. Then sitting on the seat of Kusha grass, the host should offer a 
Pind made of sesame seeds, barley flour, sugar, ghee etc. An oblation of water 
should follow it. At the end, the Brahmin should be seen off with proper 
Dakshaina. Only then the host is free to dine himself along with other invited 
guests and family members. 
DO'S AND DON'TS DURING A SHRADHA  
Madalasa says- O son! I am now narrating about the do's and don'ts to be 
followed during Shradha. Many kinds of edible items can be offered in the 
Shradha. These include cereals like barley, wheat, rice, millet, corn, etc., fish, 
flesh of deer, rabbit, bird, wild boar, goat and Neelgai (antelope). All these 
kinds of items are capable of pacifying the soul of dead ancestors for different 
period of time depending on the nature of offerings being made. Likewise 
cereals offered in sacred fire cause satisfaction for one month. Fish causes 
satisfaction for two months. 
Flesh of deer causes satisfaction for three months. Flesh of rabbit causes 
satisfaction for four months. Flesh of bird causes satisfaction for five months. 
Flesh of wild boar causes satisfaction for six months. Flesh of goat causes 

557 
 



satisfaction for seven months. Flesh of different types of deer and antelope 
causes satisfaction for eight, nine and ten months respectively. 
Food items made of cow's milk and ghee and kheer cause satisfaction to the 
dead ancestors for one year. Different varieties of rice, barley, millet, wheat, 
sesame, moong dal, mustard etc. are extremely satisfying food for the 
ancestors. Different types of pulses and corn can also be offered. Use of garlic, 
carrot, onion, radish, refined salt, red gum, gourd etc. is prohibited. Water 
that is stinking, frothy, stale or otherwise incapable of quenching a cow's 
thirst should also be discarded. Milk of doe, camel, goat, buffalo and other 
one-hoof animals, yak and such a cow that was milked for the past ten days is 
also forbidden for use in Shradha. Soil that is infested with insects, dry, baked 
with fire, stinking or collected from an unholy place should not be used. 
Similarly, such people who are violent, wretched, killers of Brahmins, 
impotent or have fiendish characters should not be involved in the Shradha. 
Cocks and pigs should also be kept away from the place of Shradha. This is the 
reason why sesame seeds are scattered at the site of Shradha secretly. The 
host must not see a woman in menses. It is also not necessary to feed a host 
of Brahmins. Instead it is sufficient to feed only one meritorious Brahmin with 
complete devotion and respect. It is enough to appease the dead ancestors. 
Appeasement of ancestors automatically lead to appeasement of the deities, 
planets, Nakshatras and all whose blessings can transform the living condition 
of the person. 
AUSPICIOUS DAYS AND MONTHS  
Madalasa says- Shradha can be performed on any day during the dark lunar 
phase in the Hindu month of Ashwin i.e. from the first day to the Amavasya. 
Performing of Shradha on any of these days brings the following benefits- 
Performing Shradha on the first day or Pratipada brings monetary gain. 
Shradha performed on the second day brings prosperity, Shradha performed 
on the third day blesses the performer with a boon. Performing Shradha on 
the fourth day leads to the destruction of enemies. Performing Shradha on the 
fifth day gives benefit from a woman; Shradha performed on the sixth day 

558 
 



helps a man to acquire respect in the society. Shradha performed on the 
seventh day makes the performer an able leader; Shradha performed on the 
eighth day enhances the intelligence. Shradha performed on the ninth day 
brings the company of the attractive women. Shradha performed on the tenth 
day leads to the fulfilment of all the desires. Performing Shradha on the 
eleventh day helps him to attain the knowledge of Vedas. 
Shradha performed on the twelfth day makes the performer victorious. 
Shradha performed on the thirteenth day leads to long life and luxuries. 
Shradha performed on the fourteenth day and Amavasya lead to the 
fulfilment of all the desires. 
Fruits of Shradha performed during different Nakshatras: NAKSHATRA-RESULT 
KRITIKA-Heaven abode ROHINI-Progeny MRIGSHIRA-Radiance ARDRA-Bravery 
PUNARVASU-Land PUSHYA-Health ASHLESHA-Sons MAGHA-Family help 
PURVAPHALGUNI-Fortune UTTARAPHALGUNI-Virtues HASTA-Greatness 
CHITRA-Beauty/ personality SWATI-Trade VISHAKHA-Progeny/desires 
ANURADHA-Respect JYESHTHA-Dominance MOOLA-Disease-free 
PURVASARHA-Popularity UTTARASARHA-No sorrows SHRAVANA-Heaven 
abode DHANISHTHA-Wealth ABHIJIT-Vedas/medicine SHATABHISHA-Animal 
wealth PURVABADRAPAD-Knowledge/cattle UTTARABADRAPAD-Precious 
metals REVATI-Horses ASHWINI-Increase in life BHARANI-Prosperity  
FORBIDDEN AND PERMITTED ITEMS  
Madalasa says- O son! Now, I will tell you the do's and don'ts for healthy 
living. Stale cereals, oil and fats stored over a prolonged period of time, items 
prepared from wheat and barley and food items which is not prepared from 
pure ghee or milk should not be consumed. Flesh of turtle, porcupine etc. is 
worth eating whereas flesh of village pigs and cocks should not be consumed. 
Brahmin can eat flesh offered to him in a Shradha. Things like conch, stone, 
gold, pearl etc. are purified simply by washing in water. Cereals either touched 
or washed by unwarranted people is not fit for any purpose. Flesh of animals 
killed by Chandala or killed for the purpose of oblation in Shradha is also 

559 
 



considered pure. Seat, bed, vehicle, boat, grass, rays of the Sun and Moon and 
air are naturally pure things. Touch by a woman who is in her menses, dog, 
jackal, a mother who has recently given birth to a child, a Chandala, carriers of 
the brier etc. is defiling in nature. A person however can become pure once 
again by taking bath if touched by any of these people and animals. One 
should not neglect the appearance of blood and cough. Excretions and water 
collected after washing the feet should be thrown out of the home at once. 
Getting touched by the people who criticize deities, ancestors, Yagya, mantra 
etc. is also defiling. Sighting of the Sun however purifies the defiled person. 
Duties of the woman: Different male and female deities dwell at the threshold 
of the home. 
Hence this portion of the home should be worshipped properly everyday. At 
dawn, the threshold should not be left vacant or it may have adverse effect on 
one's lineage. The whole area inside the home should be plastered with cow 
dung daily or washed with pure water. All these activities should be carried 
out by the better half of the householder. Those women, who prepare food 
during the last quarter of the night, suffer from infertility in future births. 
Those women, who do not sweep their home in the evening, remain 
unmarried and are bereft of wealth in future births. 
Such women also lose their wealth, lifespan and reputation. Kicking the 
following things like broom, hearth and mortar etc. or touching them with 
feet also leads to the loss of progeny and wealth. 
The householder should not use broken seat, board and black blanket for 
sitting purpose. He should not comb his hair while facing south. Those who do 
not dine, perform Havan or make donations at the appropriate time are no 
better than eunuchs. Those who shun these activities despite having wealth 
are worse than mice. Those who do not respect the deities, teachers, wife of 
the teacher, cow, Brahmin etc. are boycotted by the society. Naked are those 
who are devoid of Vedas, other religious scriptures and rituals. Such a house is 
really contemptible, which is boycotted by the Brahmins and where daily 
routines are not followed regularly. 

560 
 



After birth or death in the family, a Brahmin becomes purified in ten days. 
During this period of ten days, he should avoid all the religious activities. In 
similar conditions, a Kshatriya gets purified in twelve days after a birth or 
death in his family, a Vaishya in fifteen days and a Shudra in one month. Dead 
body of a person should be cremated outside the boundaries of the village. 
His family members should offer oblation of water to pacify his soul on the 
first, fourth, seventh and ninth days after the cremation. Ashes should be 
collected from the fourth day. In case of deaths caused by a snake bite or 
poisoning family members may get purified after a day. There is no impurity in 
case of the death of a child, an immigrant and the one who has renounced 
everything. Even their cremation is not carried out nor oblation of water is 
made. 
If one more death occurs in the family while the mourning period of the 
earlier death is still continuing, impurity of the second death lasts as long as 
that of the first one. Similar rules are applied to the impurity caused by the 
birth. Thus abiding by these norms, the householder can easily attain the four 
objectives of life that is Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. 
KING ALARKA AND HIS QUERIES ABOUT YOGA  
KING ALARKA'S RING AND WISDOM  
After reaching youth-hood, Prince Alarka got married. By that time, his father 
King Ritudhwaj had also grown old. Hence before Grihastha, he crowned his 
son as the new king. At the time of crowning, queen Madalasa presented him 
a ring and said - 'O son! This ring contains a note which will teach you on how 
a king should administer the kingdom.' Saying this, Madalasa blessed Alarka 
and left the palace with her husband Ritudhwaj to spend their lives in the 
forest. 
After his accession to the throne, King Alarka ruled justly. In due course of 
time, he got many sons. He followed the dictates of Dharma, Arth and Kama 
while ruling his kingdom. Inspite of enjoying all the luxuries, Alarka still could 
not experience bliss and felt as if he was missing something in his life. Very 

561 
 



soon, Subahu came to learn about the royal luxuries of his brother Alarka and 
got tempted to enjoy the same luxuries. To attain his objective, Subahu took 
the help of the king of Kashi. The king of Kashi sent an envoy to Alarka with a 
message to give the kingdom to Subahu, which Alarka refused. Instead, he 
sent a reply that the request must be made by Subahu himself. 'I will not give 
him my kingdom out of fear of war,' said Alarka. But Subahu did not pay heed 
and with the help of the king of Kashi, launched a massive attack on his 
kingdom and conquered it. Now Alarka's days of sorrow had begun. 
He then remembered the ring presented by his mother Madalasa. He opened 
the ring and found a letter in it. The letter said- 'When you lose your 
everything, give up the company of your present advisors and join the 
company of learned sages.' This message made Alarka to pine for the 
company of the learned sages. Very soon, he went to the refuge of Dattatreya 
and requested him to remove his miseries. Dattatreya assured him of 
removing his miseries at once but before doing that, he wanted to know the 
reasons for his miseries. Alarka said- 'I do not long for pleasures but my elder 
brother wants to grab my kingdom.'  
DATTATREYA PREACHES ALARKA  
Alarka says- 'O lord! With the arising of disenchantment in my heart, I have no 
miseries now. 
Only those people feel drowned in the ocean of miseries who are attached to 
worldly things. A man feels all kinds of sorrows due to his attachments 
towards the luxuries in which his mind indulges. Now neither sorrow nor joy 
can affect me.' Dattatreya says- 'O king! Whatever you said is correct. 
Attachment is the cause of both sorrow and happiness. It is because of the 
knowledge I gave to you that the 'mist of attachment' has disappeared from 
your heart. A small sprout of ego ultimately develops into a huge tree of 
ignorance. Affection is the trunk of this tree. Home and family are the 
branches and wife and children are the leaves of this tree. Wealth and cereals 
are the flowers and happiness and sorrow are the fruits of this tree. Relation 
that emerges out of affection is the canopy of this tree. This tree grows day by 

562 
 



day and obscures the path of liberation. This tree is full of desires and those 
who sit under the lee of this tree can never attain salvation. Hence felling of 
this tree is of foremost importance for a person desirous of attaining 
'Brahmatva.'  
YOGADHYAY 
 Dattatreya says- O king! With the attainment of knowledge, people come to 
conjugate with the Supreme Almighty and which results into dispersion of 
their ignorance. To attain Moksha, it is necessary for a man to shun 
attachment first of all. Only after that, he will become free from sorrows. 
When he becomes free from sorrow, he unites with the supreme almighty. 
This phenomenon is known as Yoga. Unification with the supreme almighty 
enables a man to attain knowledge and finally Moksha (salvation). It is 
therefore essential for the all those seeking salvation that first of all they 
should renounce affection and attachment for the worldly objects including 
their near and dear ones. 
Knowledge and renunciation are nothing but two sides of the same coin and 
one is necessary to give rise to the other. Home is nothing but the place for 
staying, food is nothing but the energy required sustaining our body and 
knowledge is nothing but an aid to attain salvation. Anything that caused 
obstacles in the way of salvation is ignorance. A living being is bound to 
receive the fruits of action no matter whether they are good or bad. Hence 
one should carry out his duties without bothering for the results. With the 
attenuation of the results of the action performed in the previous births, a 
living being becomes free from the cycles of life and death. With the 
attainment of Yoga, Yogis take refuge in none other than Brahma. But the 
path of attaining Yoga is indeed difficult, if not impossible. One has to conquer 
his soul first of all because the soul itself is regarded as invincible. Control of 
physical impurities with the help of Pranayama, sins by determination, lust by 
self-restrains and contemplation on God are the ways to conquer the soul. 
PERFECTION IN YOGA AND DAILY ROUTINE  

563 
 



Dattatreya says-During the process of conquering the soul, different kinds of 
allurements begins to divert the mind of the Yogis. It is imperative for the Yogi 
to keep his mind busy by observing fast, worshipping and contemplating in 
God. It is the duty of the Yogi to always contemplate on God, only then he can 
seek solace in Him. Thus, after controlling his senses, a Yogi ought to eat and 
sleep less, attain unification with the Supreme Being. O king! A Yogi unifies 
with Brahma once his physical and mental faults are removed. Then, he never 
separates from the Supreme Being. Alarka says- O lord, now kindly narrate 
about the daily routine, a Yogi should abide by in order to preserve his 
piousness. 
Dattatreya says- O king! Respect and insult are the two reasons for love and 
hatred. Yogis attain perfection by understanding insult as respect and vice 
versa. A Yogi should therefore never attend social functions like Shradha, 
marriage ceremonies or other festivities. He should not accept the hospitality 
of others and should shun unnecessary journeys. A Yogi should seek alms only 
after the householder and his family has dined. A Yogi should accept alms only 
from those households whose inmates are gentle, religious and free from 
blemishes and should accept things like whey, milk, fruits, edible roots, gram 
flour etc. Before going to dine, a Yogi should offer his food to the deities 
reciting he following mantras- PRANANYAY SWAHA APANAY SWAHA 
SAMANAY SWAHA UDANAY SWAHA VYANAY SWAHA After reciting these 
mantras one by one and offering food to the deities who are present in his 
body as different forms of air, the Yogi may now proceed to dine. 
Control of senses and greed, celibacy, renunciation and non-violence are the 
five resolutions of a Yogi. Control of anger, service to the Guru, sanctity, 
eating less and studying Vedas regularly are the five norms for a Yogi. A Yogi 
must practice meditation at a desolate place, forest, cave or peak of a 
mountain. A true celibate has full control over his speech, mind and action. 
Iron and gold have equal worth in his eye; he loves no one and hates no one. 
Dattatreya says- Those Yogis who abide by their resolution are never 
degraded from their supreme position. Such Yogis always recite Om while 

564 
 



contemplating on the eternal God. 'A', 'U' and 'M', these three syllables 
constitute the body OM or AUM. These three syllables represent the virtues 
(gunas) of Satva, Tamas and Rajas respectively. Thus, by contemplating on 
God and reciting Om, a Yogi ultimately achieves unification with that eternal 
spirit. But there are still some disastrous traps that a Yogi should guard 
himself against, otherwise his entire penance might turn futile at the time of 
death. Hence every Yogi must be aware of these disastrous traps. 
DESCRIPTION OF DISASTROUS TRAPS  
Dattatreya says- A person who is unable to see the path of the deities, or the 
heavenly bodies like- Dhruva, Shukra (Venus), Soma (Moon), or his own 
shadow or Goddess Arundhati, must understand that his death is near. For 
those people to whom, the Sun appears without radiance but fire appears as 
the Sun, die within eleven months. Sighting of gold and silver in urine or stools 
signifies death within ten months. Those who see ghosts, Gandharvas and 
gold tree in the dreams live for nine months only. Those who become fat or 
thin suddenly live for eight months more. Those Yogis whose heels appear 
cracked while walking on sand or mud die within seven months. Getting 
perched on the body by volatile birds like vulture, pigeon, owl, crow etc. 
indicates that the concerned person will live for only six months. Those who 
see their shadow in opposite direction live for four or five months more only. 
Those who sight lightning without clouds or rainbow during the night time, in 
their dream live for two or three months more. Those who cannot see their 
reflection in ghee, oil, water and mirror die within a month. A person whose 
body smells like a cadaver die within fifteen days. Those whose hands and feet 
remain dry even after taking bath and dry even after taking light refreshments 
live only for ten days. Those who sight hair, cinders, ash, snakes and dried 
rivers in the dream, die on the eleventh day. Those who feel hungry even after 
eating to their fill also die soon. 
O king! There are many more disastrous symptoms that indicate death. A Yogi 
must always be alert regarding these signs. Whenever a Yogi perceives the 

565 
 



appearance of all or some of these disastrous symptoms, he must at once take 
to Yoga to minimise the effects. 
Brahmagyan- A Yogi experiences extreme joy when he meditates while doing 
Yoga. Only then can he experience Brahma. Physical body is ephemeral; hence 
a true Yogi does not mourn over the loss of physical body. Hence, a Yogi must 
train his mind in Yoga ignoring sorrow or affection. This is indeed a difficult 
task to achieve. 
Alarka says- O Brahmin! By your blessings, my ignorance has ended. Now I will 
do everything so that ignorance does not grip me once again. 
Then taking Dattatreya's permission, Alarka went back to the king of Kashi and 
said- 'O king! You have a desire for the kingdom, so take this kingdom and 
enjoy its luxuries yourself or give it to Subahu.' The king of Kashi asked Alarka 
as to why he was renouncing the kingdom without fighting a war. He also tried 
to instigate Alarka by saying that his conduct did not suit the Kshatriyas. 
Alarka said- 'Only Brahma is truth, all the other things are false. Now 
controlling my senses, I will attain perfection in Yoga.'  
ALARKA MASTERS YOGA AND PENANCE OF JADA AND HIS FATHER  
Words of Alarka pleased the king of Kashi. Even, Subahu got up gladly and 
after embracing Alarka said to the king of Kashi- "O king, I had taken your 
refuge to win the kingdom. Now, I have got it without fighting a war and 
without a drop of blood being shed. But, I am leaving now, renouncing 
everything." The king of Kashi said- "Subahu, why had you taken refuge in me? 
What have you received now?" Subahu said- "O king! My younger brother 
Alarka had been so far indulging in luxuries despite having metaphysical 
knowledge. He was in fact experiencing miseries in his household. When the 
miseries cross all limits, only then renunciation arises in the mind, as is the 
case with Alarka. 
That was why I had taken your refuge. My job is finished now. So I am leaving 
to attain perfection in Yoga. O king, I regard those people who ignore their 
near and dear ones in their miseries as heartless. 

566 
 



Such people are degraded from their position of Dharma, Artha, Kama and 
Moksha and are criticised everywhere." The king of Kashi said- "O Subahu, You 
have saved your brother Alarka. Now kindly save me also." Subahu said- 
"Attainment of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha are the four major 
objectives for the attainment of which humans have been created. You have 
already attained Dharma, Artha and Kama. Only Moksha remains to be 
attained now. 'It is mine', 'It is me' etc. are expressions of ego. Guarding the 
self from these thoughts is the true knowledge. A man must know 'What is to 
be known? 'Who is to know?' and 'Who is he?' A knowledge of these 
automatically leads to the knowledge of all." Saying these words, Subahu left 
the palace. 
The king of Kashi too returned to his kingdom. Alarka crowned his elder son as 
the new king and he began to practice Yoga in a forest. After many years of 
rigorous practice, Alarka attained salvation and his abode in Brahma loka. 
The Brahmin's son said- "O father! Now you too must take refuge in Yoga in 
order to attain Brahma. I too will try to attain salvation." The birds say- "O 
Brahmin! Thus the father and son began their penance and attained salvation. 
 
THE UNIVERSE AND LORD BRAHMA'S MANIFESTATION  
THE ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE  
Jaimini thanked the birds for enlightening him with self-knowledge. But he 
was still not satisfied. There were many questions to which he had no 
answers. He asked the birds- 'How did this universe come into being? What 
will happen to it during the time of final annihilation? How did the deities, the 
sages, the ancestors and the living creatures originate? How did the 
Manvantaras arrive? I am anxious to know about all these things.' The birds 
replied- 'O Jaimini! We salute the same Jagannath who creates in the form of 
Lord Brahma, nurtures the world as Lord Vishnu and ultimately annihilates the 
world as Lord Shiva in his most terrifying form. We will now reveal the 
knowledge which was once narrated by sage Markandeya.' The birds then 

567 
 



narrated the following tale as was originally told by sage Markandeya. 'In the 
beginning of creation, as soon as Lord Brahma manifested himself, all the four 
Vedas and eighteen Puranas came out from his four mouths. Lord Brahma 
then created the SaptaRishis merely by wishing, who took all the Vedas and 
Puranas in their possession.' 'Later on, sage Chyavan got the Puranas from one 
of the SaptaRishis- sage Bhrigu and read out its contents to the assembled 
sages. The sages then retold the Puranas to Daksha. Daksha narrated the 
contents of the Puranas to me (Markandeya). The virtues of listening to 
Puranas are capable of destroying all sins of a man. Now I am going to reveal 
to you that secret knowledge of Purana as was told to me by Daksha.' 
'Brahma- the cause and effect of everything pervades the universe even after 
the final annihilation. All the three gunas are present in him. When the time is 
appropriate for commencing the process of creation, the whole atmosphere is 
covered by the great element (Mahatatva), which itself comprises of the three 
basic gunas- Satva (pure), Rajas (semi-pure) and Tamas (dark).' 'Ego manifests 
itself from the great element (Mahatatva). Even the ego remains covered by 
the great element. The ego then creates 'Shabda tanmatra' (subtle forms of 
matter related with sound). The sky which symbolizes the Shabda (sound) is 
created from this very Shabda tanmatra.' 'The ego then covers the whole sky. 
After that Sparsh tanmatra (subtle forms of matter related with touch) comes 
into being. Air, which signifies the quality of touch, then comes into being. 
After the creation of air, light is created without which the forms and 
appearance cannot be perceived.' 'The deformity of life results into the 
creation of Rasa matra. From this very Rasa matra, water comes into being. 
The water is enveloped by the Roop matra (subtle forms of appearance). The 
water then gets deformed and as a result Gandha matra comes into being, 
from which the earth is created. All the worlds are established in this earth.' 
'First of all, the gunas enter into the atoms and create the seven basic 
elements which are a must for procreation. The seven basic elements then 
establish themselves in Purusha and Prakriti. The union of Purusha and 
Prakriti results into the creation of egg. This egg keeps expanding in its size 
while being in water.' 'Lord Brahma who is also known as Kshetragya and who 

568 
 



is also the creator of all the souls dwells in that egg.' The same Brahma 
pervades all the three worlds. All the creatures of the world including the 
deities, demons and human beings along with islands, mountains, oceans, air 
and sky etc. are present inside the egg.' 'The Mother Nature along with the 
great element covers this egg. This way, the seven natural coverings envelop 
the egg. Beyond the Prakriti (nature) is established the Purusha (Almighty).' 
'Now I am going to reveal the identity of Brahma to you. Just as drops of water 
fall down from the body of a wet man immersed in water, in the same way, 
Lord Brahma too discards off the egg in the end. The nature is nothing else but 
Kshetra (space, area) and Brahma is also known as Kshetragya. This way, the 
whole creation came into being just like lightning. 
LORD BRAHMA'S LIFESPAN  
Kraustuki said- 'Tell me! O lord! How were the living beings created as the 
period of final annihilation was approaching its end.' Markandeya replied- 
'When the nature establishes herself in the soul of the Purusha (supreme 
Almighty), all the created matter gets annihilated. Prakriti and Purusha are 
established in the mode of parallelism. During that period, Satva and Tamas 
become neutrally balanced. Even the quality of Rajas establishes itself within 
the qualities of Satva and Tamas.' 'The life span of Brahma consists of 
Dwiparardha. The day and night of Brahma are of equal duration. Brahma is 
the origin of this universe. He is the inconceivable soul, the supreme Lord and 
the cause of all the events. He is beyond the reach of activities. He enters into 
Prakriti and Purusha- excites both of them to get unified. When Prakriti gets 
excited, the Supreme Lord manifests Himself in the egg as Brahma. He then 
commences his creation. The same Brahma attains the form of Vishnu due to 
the effect of his Satva guna and nurtures the whole creation. 
Under the influence of Tamas guna, He attains the form of Rudra and finally 
annihilates the whole creation. He then goes into hibernation.' 'This way, the 
same Almighty God in his three different forms of Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahesh performs his duties of creation, nurturing and annihilation 
respectively. The life span of Brahma consists of one hundred years. The 

569 
 



division of time is as follows- One Kashtha consists of fifteen Nimeshas. One 
Kala consists of thirty Kashthas whereas thirty Kalas make one Muhurta. One 
day and night of this material world consists of thirty Muhurtas. Thirty days 
and nights are equivalent to one month or two fortnights (Pakshas).' 'Six 
months make one Ayan. Two Ayans make a year. A day and night of the 
deities are equivalent to one year of this material world. Similarly twelve 
thousand years of the deities make the four yugas. Satya Yuga consists of the 
four thousand years of the deities. Treta Yuga consists of three thousand years 
of the deities. Dwapar Yuga consists of two thousand years of the deities 
whereas Kali Yuga consists of one thousand years of the deities. Similarly 
Sandhya (evening) period of Satya Yuga consists of four hundred years and 
Sandhyansh (part of evening) consists of the same period that is four hundred 
years. Thus the total number of years that Satya Yuga has come up to 
4000+400+400= 4800 years. In the same way, the Sandhya and Sandhyansh of 
Treta Yuga consist of 300 years each. Thus, the total number of years in Treta 
Yuga comes up to 3000+300+300= 3600 years. Sandhya and Sandhyansh 
period of Dwapar Yuga is of 200 years each. Thus the total number of years in 
Dwapar Yuga comes up to 2000+200+200= 2400 years. 
Sandhya and Sandhyansh period of Kali Yuga are of 100 years each. Thus the 
total number of years in Kali Yuga comes up to 1000+100+100= 1200 years. 
A day of Brahma consists of thousand times of the twelve thousand years of 
the deities. Fourteen Manus appear in succession during the whole day of 
Brahma. Each Manavantar comprises of a Manu and his progenies, Indra and 
the other deities, SaptaRishis ganas and Nripati ganas etc. 
A Manavantar consists of seventy-one Chaturyugas. On the basis of the years 
of this material world, a Manavantar consists of 30,67,20,000 years or 
8,52,000 years of the deities. A Brahma's day consists of 4,29,40,00,000 years 
of this world or 1,19,28,000 years of the deities. The dissolution, which occurs 
at the end of the day of Brahma, is also known as causal dissolution (Naimittik 
Pralaya). During the time of causal dissolution, all the residents of Bhur, Bhuva 
and Swarga lokas temporarily go to Mahar loka. The residents of Mahar loka 

570 
 



shift their base to Jana loka. The entire universe is submerged in the ocean 
during the time of causal dissolution and this is the time for Brahma to take 
rest i.e. at night. Brahma starts his creation at the end of the night. 
This way, after the completion of three hundred and sixty years of Brahma, his 
one-year is complete. One hundred such years of Brahma make one Para and 
five hundred such years make one Parardha. One Parardha of Brahma has 
already passed at the end of which Padram Mahakalpa occurred. The present 
period, which falls under the second Parardha, is also known as Varaha Kalpa. 
NATURAL AND FLAWED CREATIONS 
Kraustuki asked curiously- 'Tell me how Brahma did his creations?' 
Markandeya replied- 'When Brahma got up from his sleep after the end of 
dissolution (Pralaya) named Padram, he found a void all around himself. He 
remembered Narayana who is also known by the name of Nastanu i.e. one 
who dwells in water. Narayana was engrossed in his eternal sleep. After 
waking up, he rescued the earth, submerged in the ocean just like he had 
done in the previous Kalpas by taking the forms of a boar, a fish and tortoise 
etc. But even after the earth was brought up from the seabed and was 
established above the ocean, it was still swinging like a boat. Narayana then 
created the mountains to stop the earth from swinging. But the mountains 
were burnt down by Agni (fire) named Samvartak. The mountains submerged 
into the ocean. 
The mountains after having displaced the water had become fixed at their 
respective places. 
Therefore, Narayana divided the whole earth into seven islands and created 
the four lokas just like before. After that, five Avidyas came into being. This 
way, the whole creation established themselves in five ways. The whole 
creation was hidden in darkness till this period. After this, Narayana created 
the ignorant animals, which symbolised the Tamas guna. After the animals the 
deities who symbolised the Satva guna were created.' 'Brahma was extremely 
satisfied by the creations of Narayana. But he was desirous of creating even 

571 
 



more superior creatures. As a result a group of Sadhakas named Arvaksrota 
came into being. These Sadhakas were humans who possessed Rajas guna. 
The fifth creation of Anugraha was itself sub-divided into four parts- 
Viparyaya, Siddhi, Shanti and Srishti. The sixth creation was of those special 
people who had the knowledge of past and present events. These people had 
wives, enjoyed life in a balanced way but were of evil nature. These people 
were known as Bhutadik.' 'The first creation was related with the 
manifestation of Lord Brahma himself. This great creation was known as the 
Maha Srishti. The second creation related with the part of Brahma is called 
Bhutsarga. The third creation is called Prakrit and which consists of creatures 
possessing intelligence and flawed sensual perceptions. The fourth creation 
consists of the Sthawars who are unable to move (e.g. vegetation). The fifth 
creation consists of four-footed animals. The sixth creation consists of the 
deities whereas the seventh creation that of human beings which originates 
from Arvaksrota. The eighth creation is known as Anugraha. The ninth 
creation of Brahma is known as Prakrit (natural) and Vikari (flawed). These are 
the nine types of creation of Brahma. The root causes of this universe are 
Prakrit and Vikari.' CREATION OF THE DEITIES Kraustuki then asked 
Markandeya about the origin of the deities. Markandeya replied- 'With the 
objective of creating the deities, demons, ancestors and human beings, 
Brahma abandoned the part of his physical body in the ocean. The demons 
originated from the thighs of his abandoned body. Lord Brahma blessed the 
demons with physical bodies, which were Tamasik in nature. 
This part of Brahma's body became famous as Ratri (night). After that Brahma 
created the deities from his mouth with the help of Satva guna. The deities 
were given pure bodies. This part of Brahma's body which was Satvik (pure) in 
nature became famous as day.' 'After this, Brahma acquired another physical 
body and created the ancestors. After creating the ancestors, he abandoned 
his body, which transformed itself in the evening. Brahma then acquired 
another body, which was affluent of Rajas qualities and thus was created 
human being. He again abandoned his body and from it was created Jyotsna- 
the transition period of day and night.' 'Jyotsna, evening and day contain the 

572 
 



quality of Satva in themselves. Night has the quality of Tamas in itself. The 
deities, demons and human beings are most powerful during the day, night 
and Jyotsna period respectively. The ancestors are most powerful and 
invincible during the evening time.' 'Brahma then created creatures who had 
moustaches and beard on their face. Some creatures among them started 
attacking the others. Those who were being attacked and pleaded 'save us' 
were called the Rakshasas (demons). The attackers who thundered 'we would 
devour you up' were known as Yakshas (celestial beings). 
'Brahma was very displeased by their tantrums. Some of his hair fell down on 
earth and thus were created the snakes. The flesh-eating Ganas were next to 
be created. These Ganas were extremely volatile in nature. After that, Brahma 
created the Gandharvas.' 'This way after having created these eight types of 
divine creation, Brahma created all the animals and birds from his body. He 
created the goat from his mouth, lamb from his heart, cow from his stomach 
and back, animals like horse, elephant, donkey, rabbit, deer, camel and mule 
were created by Brahma from both his legs. Variety of vegetation and 
medicinal plants were created from the hair of his body.' 'Brahma then 
created the following things from the first of his four mouths- Gayatri, Tri- rik, 
tri- vrit, Sam, Rathantar and Agnishtom. From his mouth facing south, he 
created Yajuh, Traishtumchhand, Panchadasha-stom, Vrihatsam and Uktha. 
From his mouth facing west, he created Sham, Jagatichhand, Panchadasha-
stom, Vairoop and Atiratra. 
From his mouth facing north, he created twenty-one Atharva, Aptoryam, 
Anushtubha and Vairaj.' 'In the beginning of Kalpa, Brahma created the 
natural things like lightning, Vajra, cloud, rainbow and birds. After that he 
created the deities etc. He then created stable things like mountains, living 
creatures that could move, demons, birds, animals and snakes etc. All these 
living creatures take birth and rebirths, reap the fruits of the past Karmas 
done in their previous life. This is the way Brahma had done creation at the 
end of the dissolution period.'  
COPULATIVE CREATIONS  

573 
 



Markandeya says- Brahma created one thousand couples from his mouth in 
the beginning of creation. These couples were radiant and possessed virtuous 
qualities (Satvik).  
Once again, Brahma created one thousand couples from his chest but this 
time they possessed the quality of Rajas. This phenomenon was repeated for 
the second time and once again one thousand couples manifested themselves 
from his chest. These couples were both Rajas as well as Tamasik by nature. At 
last Brahma created one thousand more couples from both his legs. These 
couples were completely Tamasik by nature. The couples started copulating 
and this process has been continuing since then.' 'Brahma now became 
worried as to how to accommodate such a large number of people. Initially, 
these people used to roam about every where, as there were no permanent 
residences to accomodate them. At the arrival of Treta Yuga, they developed 
attachment and started living in houses. Subsequently they started living in 
various types of abodes- Pura, Village, Dronimukha, Shakhanagar, Kharvatak, 
Drami, Gram and Sanghosh etc.'  
DAKSHA'S LINEAGE  
Markandeya says- 'Brahma on seeing that inspite of all his creations the 
population was not increasing, he decided to create his Manasputras. These 
Manasputras were created merely by his wish. Their names were Bhrigu, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Angira, Marichi, Daksha, Atri and Vashishta. After this, 
he first created the ferocious Rudra and then Sankalpa and Dharma. But all 
these people were very virtuous, knowledgeable and unaffected by worldly 
desires. They showed their disinclination towards the purpose for which they 
have been created by Brahma i.e. increasing the population. Brahma became 
very furious in his anger and created an entity whose half portion resembled a 
man's body while the remaining half resembled that of a woman. 
Brahma instructed that entity to bisect his body into two distinct forms of a 
man and a woman. 

574 
 



The entity followed Brahma's instruction and this way Swayambhu Manu and 
Shatrupa came into being. Manu accepted Shatrupa as his wife. Two sons 
were born to them- Priyavrata and Uttanpada. Apart from these two sons, 
two daughters were also born to them- Akuti and Prasuti. 
Prasuti was married to Daksha while Akuti was married to Ruchi. Twenty-four 
daughters were born to Daksha and Prasuti out of which thirteen of them 
were married to Dharma. The remaining eleven daughters were married to 
sages like Bhrigu, Mahadeva, Marichi, Angira, Atri etc.' 'Dharma fathered 
Kama from Shradha. Sri gave birth to Darpa, Dhriti and Niyama. Tushti gave 
birth to Santosh, Pushti to Lobha, Medha to Shrut, Kriya to Dand, Buddhi to 
Bodh, Lajja to Vinay, Vapra to Vyavasay, Shanti to Kshema, Siddhi to Sukh and 
Kirti gave birth to Yash. 
Kama, the son of Dharma was the father of Atihrishta.' 'Himsa- the wife of 
Adharma gave birth to Anrita. Anrita was married to Nirriti. Two sons named 
Narak and Bhaya and two daughters named Maya and Vedana were born to 
them.' 'Maya gave birth to Mrityu, whereas Dukha was born as a result of 
Narak's marriage with Vedana. Five children were born to Mrityu- Vyadhi, 
Jara, Shoka, Trishna and Krodha. All of them were very irreligious by nature 
and they never got an opportunity get married and have progenies.' 'Mrityu's 
wife- Nirriti is also known by the name of Alakshmi. Altogether fourteen sons 
were born to them. All these fourteen sons of Mrityu dwell in the organs of 
human beings, during the time of destruction. Out of these fourteen sons, ten 
dwell in the sense organs of human beings and the eleventh son dwells in the 
mind. They influence the sense organs and the mind of a man in a negative 
way by means of attachment and anger. The twelfth son exists in the form of 
arrogance. The thirteenth son Apar adversely affects the intelligence of a man. 
The fourteenth son- Duhsah resides in the house of males. Duhsah is naked, 
always hungry, his mouth facing downwards and caws like the crow. 
DESCENDANTS OF DUHSAH  
Markandeya says- 'Nirmashti, the wife of Duhsah was the daughter of Yama. 
Altogether sixteen children were born to Duhsah and Nirmashti. Out of them 

575 
 



eight were sons and the remaining eight were daughters. The name of the 
sons were- Dantakrishti, Tathokti, Parivarta, Angadhruka, Shakuni, Ganda, 
Pranrati, Garbhaha and Sasyaha while the names of the daughters were 
Niyojika, Virodhini, Swayamaharini, Bhramani, Rituharika, Smritihara, Beejhara 
and Vidveshini. Dantakrishti causes the teeth of the child to make a grinding 
sound. Tathokti is commonly used while men are conversing by saying, 'So be 
it' (Tathastu). Parivarta becomes happy by establishing an alien foetus in the 
womb of women. Angadhruka causes the organs of human beings to throb 
and enables him to express the emotions of joy and sorrow. Shakuni resides in 
the bodies of birds like crow and animals like dog or fox.' 'Ganda destroys all 
the virtues. Garbhaha destroys the foetus in the womb of a woman while 
Sasyaha destroys all kinds of wealth.' 'Among the daughters, Niyojika 
encourages a man to have illicit relationship and also to steal the wealth of 
others. Virodhini causes differences between husband and wife and also 
among the family members. Swayamaharini destroys the prosperity of a man. 
Bhramani causes restlessness and anger in the heart of a man living at one 
place for a long time. Rituharika destroys the menstrual cycle of women. 
Smritiharika causes loss of memory. Beejhara destroys the sexual powers of a 
man and woman. Dweshini causes jealousy in the heart of a man and woman. 
Altogether 38 children were born to all the 16 children of Duhsah and 
Nirmashti. All of them were wicked and caused miseries to people.' THE 
CREATION OF RUDRAS Markandeya says- 'Now I am going to tell you about 
Rudrasarga. One of the eight sons of Brahma started wailing after being 
created from his (Brahma) body. Brahma asked him as to why he was crying. 
The crying child requested Brahma to give him a name. Brahma named him as 
Rudra since he was wailing at the time of his birth. But even after getting his 
name, the child's wailing did not stop. He wailed for seven times and as a 
result seven more children were manifested from his cries. Brahma named 
these seven children as Bhava, Sharva, Ishan, Pashupati, Bheem, Ugra and 
Mahadeva. He also gave them abodes so that they could live. The following 
eight things respectively symbolize the forms of all these eight rudras- Sun, 
water, earth, fire, air, sky, Dikshit Brahmin and Soma. All these eight rudras 

576 
 



were also given their respective wives who were Suvarchala, Uma, Vikeshi, 
Swadha, Swaha, Dik, Diksha and Rohini.' 'The eight sons of all the eight rudras 
are Shanaishwar, Shukra, Lohitang, Manojav, Skand, Sarg, Santan and Buddh 
respectively.' 'Rudra had accepted Sati as his wife. Sati gave up her life 
because her father Daksha had shown disrespect to her husband- Rudra. Sati 
took her second birth as Parvati, the daughter of Himavan. 
Mainak was her brother. Bhava married Parvati. Khyati was Bhrigu's wife. 
They had two children- Dhata and Vidhata. Lakshmi was the consort of 
Narayana. Meru had two daughters Ayati and Niyati. Both of them were 
married to Dhata and Vidhata respectively. Each one of them had two sons. 
Ayati had named her son as Pran while Niyati named her son as Mrikandu. 
The same Mrikandu is my (Markandeya) father. My mother's name is 
Manaswini and my son's name is Vedashira.' 'Sambhuti- the wife of Marichi 
gave birth to Paurnmas. Smriti- the wife of Marichi gave birth to four 
daughters- Siniwali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati.' 'Ansuya, the wife of sage Atri 
gave birth to three sons- Soma, Durvasa and Dattatreya. Dutt and Dambholi 
were born to Preeti, the wife of Pulastya. He became famous as Agastya 
during the time of Swayambhuva Manavantar.' 'Three sons- Kardam, 
Arvaveera and Sahishnu were born to Kshama, the wife of Pulaha. 
Sannati, the wife of Ritu gave birth to 60,000 Balkhilyaganas. Urja- the wife of 
Vashishta gave birth to seven sons- Raja, Gatra, Urdhwabahu, Sabal, Anagh, 
Sutapa and Shukra. These seven are famous as the SaptaRishis.' 'Agni was 
married to Swaha. Three sons were born to them- Pavak, Pavamana and 
Shuchi.'  
THE VARIOUS MANVANTARS 
SWAYAMBHUVA MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says- 'Swayambhuva Manu had ten sons. He had divided the 
whole earth into seven continents. In the beginning of Treta Yuga, the sons of 
Priyavrata had done the same. Prajavatithe daughter of Kardam Prajapati had 
ten sons and two daughters from Priyavrata. Names of these ten sons were- 

577 
 



Agnighna, Medhatithi, Vayushman, Jyotishman, Dyutiman, Bhatya, Savan, 
Medha, Agnibahu and Mitra. Among all these ten sons, the last three never 
ruled any kingdom. 
The remaining seven sons were made the rulers of all the seven continents by 
Priyavrata. 
Agnighna was made the ruler of Jambudweep, Medhatithi that of 
Plakshdweep. Vayushman was given Shalmalidweep whereas Jyotishman was 
made the ruler of Kushdweep. Similarly, Dyutiman was given Kraunchdweep 
to rule while Bhatya was given Shakdweep. The seventh son, Savan was made 
the ruler of Pushkardweep. Savan had two sons- Medhavi and Dhataki. 
Savan sub-divided the Pushkardweep into two parts and each part was given 
to each of the sons. 
Bhatya had seven sons- Jalad, Kumar, Sukumar, Marnavak, Kushottar, 
Medhavi and Mahadrum. 
Bhatya too sub-divided the Shakdweep into seven parts and distributed them 
among all his sons. 
Similarly, Dyutiman too had seven sons to whom were distributed his kingdom 
Kraunchdweep after sub-dividing it into seven parts. Jyotishman, Vayushman 
and Medhatithi made their respective sons the rulers after giving them 
kingdoms. Agnighna was the ruler of Jambudweep. 
He had nine sons. His kingdom was equally distributed among all of them. 
Nabhi- the son of Agnighna was the father of Rishabh. Bharata was the son of 
Rishabh. Bharata was given the southern part of Rishabh's kingdom. Our 
country is named after Bharata.' 
JAMBUDWEEP 
 Markandeya says that the total area of Jambudweep comprises of one lakh 
Yojan while the area of Plakshdweep is twice the area of Jambudweep i.e. two 
lakh Yojans. Similarly, Shalmali is twice the area of Plaksh while Kusha is twice 
the area of Shalmali. The area of Kraunchdweep is twice the area of 

578 
 



Kushdweep whereas the area of Shakdweep is twice the area of 
Kraunchdweep. 
The island of Pushkar is twice the area of Shak. Seven mountains are situated 
in all these seven islands. They are Himavan, Hemkut, Rishabh, Meru, Neel, 
Shwet and Sringi. Ilavrit is situated in the middle of six mountains, which 
themselves are situated in the middle of the ocean surrounding all the seven 
islands named earlier. Sumeru Mountain is situated in the central part of 
Ilavrit. People belonging to all the four castes- Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and 
Shudra reside in Ilavrit. 
Just above Ilavrit are the dwelling places of Lokpals like Indra etc. Lord 
Brahma's assembly is situated at the center. Beneath Ilavrit are situated the 
four mountains- Mandar, Gandhmadan, Vipul and Suparshva. These four 
mountains are situated in each of the four directions. The Great Mountain 
Nishadh is situated towards the west of Meru, while the Great Mountain 
Pariyatra is situated just behind it. Towards the south of Meru are situated the 
great mountains, Kailash and Himavan. The mountains Sringvan and Jarudhi 
are situated towards the north of Meru Mountain. 
River Jambu flows all around the Meru Mountain in a circular path. 
THE ORIGIN OF GANGA  
Markandeya says- 'River Ganga originates from a place named Dhruvadhar. 
This particular place is related with Narayana. River Ganga, then falls on the 
Sumeru Mountain and gets distributed into four main streams. One of these 
streams flows towards Chaitrartha forest. The name of this particular stream 
is Sita. The same Sita Ganga enters into the Varunaoda reservoir and from 
there, it moves towards the ocean and again changes its course to get 
submerge into that stream of Ganga, which has fallen on the Gandhmadan 
Mountain and which is known as Alaknanda. 
Alaknanda after submerging into Mansarovar subsequently entered the 
Mahadri Himalaya where Lord Shankar held her in His locks of hair. He 
released river Ganga only at the request of sage Bhagirath. 

579 
 



After being released, river Ganga got subdivided into seven streams and 
ultimately, all those seven streams submerged into the ocean. The stream of 
Ganga which originates from the west of Sumeru Mountain is known as 
Suchakshu. This stream gets submerged in the ocean towards the south, after 
passing through many mountains. The fourth stream reaches Savita forest 
after passing through two mountains- Suparshu and Meru. This particular 
stream is famously known as Bhadrasoma. Bhadrasoma Ganga ultimately get 
submerged into the ocean after passing through mountains like Shankhkoot 
and Vrishabh. 
BHARATAVARSHA 
Kraustuki asked Markandeya- 'O lord! Please describe about Bharatavarsha.' 
Markandeya replied- 'Bharatavarsha is surrounded by oceans on all its three 
sides. People living towards the east of Bharatavarsha are known as Kirat 
while people living towards the west are called Yavan. 
The central part of Bharatavarsha is inhabited by all the four castes- Brahmin, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. The seven mountains are situated in the 
central part of Bharatavarsha. They are Mahendra, Malaya, Sahaya, 
Shaktiman, Riksh, Vindhya and Pariyatra. There are thousands of hills situated 
in the vicinity of these seven mountains. The central part of Bharatavarsha is 
sub-divided into Janpadas. The residents of these Janpadas are known as 
Mlechha and Arya. All the major rivers of Bharatavarsha like Ganga, Saraswati, 
Sindhu, Chandrabhaga, Yamuna, Shatadru, Vitasta, Irawati, Gomti, Vipasha 
and Gandki etc. originate from the mountains situated in the central parts. 
The names of the prominent Janpadas situated in the central part of 
Bharatavarsha are Matsya, Ashwakoot, Kulya, Kuntal, Kashi, Koshal, Arbuda, 
Kalinga, Malak, Vrik etc. River Godavari flows towards the north of Sahya 
Mountain. 
A city named Govardhan is situated near this mountain. Some other 
prominent places situated in the vicinity of this mountain are Bahalik, 
Vataghan, Amir and Kaltoyak. Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudras live in the 
following states- Shudra, Pahalav, Charmakhandika, Gandhar, Yavan, Sindhu, 

580 
 



Sauveer, Bhadrak, Shatadruj, Parad and Kekaya. The following states are 
situated in the north of Bharatavarsha- Tamas, Hansmarg, Kashmir, Shulik, 
Kuhak, Urna, Darva etc. States like Abhrarak, Mudgarak, Antagiri, Plawang, 
Mal, Damal, Vartik, Uttarbrahma, Pragjyotish, Madra, Videha, Tamraliptak, 
Malla and Magadh are situated in the east of Bharatavarsha. States situated in 
the south of Bharatavarsha are Pandya, Kerala, Chola, Maharashtra, Mahishik, 
Kalinga and Amir. These are the Janpadas where Shabar live.' 'Janpadas 
situated in the west of Bharatavarsha are Suryarak, Kalibala, Durg, Kaha, 
Pulind, Toshal and Koshal etc. Bharatavarsha is the only country in the whole 
world where all the four yugas- Satya, Treta, Dwapar, and Kali occur in a cyclic 
way. Bharatavarsha is the root of all forms of divinity where deities reside and 
almighty God takes incarnation.'  
TORTOISE INCARNATION  
Kraustuki asked Markandeya- 'O lord! How does Sri Hari live in the form of a 
tortoise?' Markandeya replied- 'Sri Hari in the form of a tortoise sits facing 
east. States situated in the central portion of his body are Vedi, Madra, 
Mandavya, Shalva, Khasa, Saraswat, Matsya etc. 
States which are situated in the mouth of the tortoise are Vrishadhwaj, Anjan, 
Kasha, Magadh, Pragjyotish, Mithila, Koshal etc. In the right foot of the 
tortoise are situated states like Kalinga, Banga etc. Vindhya Mountain is also 
situated in the right foot. States which are situated in the tail of the tortoise 
are Manimegha, Kshuradri, Khanj, Konkan, Panchmad, Vamana, Sharkar, 
Chulik, Ashwakesha etc. Mandakya, Chandarwar, Ashwa, Kaland, Ghor, 
Ghuratwadi are the states that are situated in the left foot of the tortoise. 
Janpadas like Kailash, Himalaya, Kraunch, Kaikaya, Takshashila, Gandhar, 
Kharas, Yaudheya and Rajanya etc. are situated in the left side of the tortoise's 
abdomen.' Narayana in the form of tortoise is that inconceivable soul in which 
reside all the lords of deities and constellations. 
BHADRASHVA VARSHA  

581 
 



Markandeya says- 'Bhadrashva Varsh is situated towards the east of the great 
mountain Devakut. 
Five more mountains are situated within its area- Kauranj, Shwetaparna, 
Neela, Shaiwal and Parnashalagra. Bhadrashva consists of thousands of 
Janpadas. Numerous rivers like Sita, Shankhavali, Bhadra and Chakravarta 
flows there. People living in Bhadrashva Varsh are full of radiance and they 
live for 1000 years. Narayana dwells in Bhadrashva in his incarnation of 
Hayagreev.' 'Now I am going to tell about Ketumal Varsh which has seven 
mountains within its area- Vishal, Kambal, Krishna, Jayant, Hariparvat, 
Vishoka, and Vardhaman. There are thousands of smaller hills apart from 
these seven major mountains where people live. The names of the rivers 
flowing at Ketumal Varsh are Vankshuyama, Swakambha, Amogha, Kamini, 
Shyama etc. Narayana dwells in Ketumal Varsh in his incarnation of a boar 
(Varaha).' 'Now listen about Uttarkurudesha. There are thousands of trees, 
which are fruit laden in all the seasons. Apparels are made from the bark of 
the trees and ornaments from its fruits. After being degraded, the residents of 
Devaloka take birth here. Uttarkuru has two mountains- Chandrakant and 
Suryakant. The river- Bhadrasoma flows between these two mountains. 
Narayana in his incarnation of Matsya (fish) lives at Uttarkuru. Chandradweep 
and Bhadradweep are the two famous islands situated at Uttarkuru.'  
KIMPURUSHA VARSHA  
Markandeya says- 'The people residing in KimPurusha Varsh enjoy a long life. 
They live for 10,000 years. They are never bothered by any kind of disease or 
sorrow. Just behind Kimpurusha Varsh is situated Hari Varsh. The residents of 
Hari Varsh enjoy an eternally youthful life because of the sugarcane juice they 
intake. Meru Varsh, which is situated near Hari Varsh, is also known as Ilavrit. 
It is devoid of the light of the Sun but gets sufficient light from the radiant 
Sumeru Mountain. It is so bright that even the Sun gets overshadowed. People 
living in Meru Varsh enjoy a very long life for 30,000 years. Similarly people 
living in Ramyak Varsh sustain themselves by drinking fruit juice. They live for 
10,000 years. Hiranyamay Varsh is situated towards the north of Ramyak 

582 
 



Varsh where the river Hiranvati flows. The residents of Hiranyamay are 
powerful, rich and handsome in appearance. 
SWAROCHISH MANVANTAR  
Kraustuki asked Markandeya- 'O great sage! Now tell me something about 
Swarochish Manavantar?' Markandeya replied- ' 
Once upon a time, there lived a Brahmin at the bank of river Varuna. One day, 
a guest arrived at his place. The Brahmin treated his guest with due respect. 
After formal introduction, the Brahmin became aware that his guest was not 
an ordinary person. He had travelled around the world with the help of some 
special mantras he knew and medicinal herbs, which he had in his possession. 
The Brahmin was quite impressed. He too wanted to see the whole earth. He 
requested his guest to give the mantra and the medicinal herb so that he 
could travel around the world just like him. The guest applied some medicinal 
solution on his legs. 
After this the Brahmin went to see the Himalaya Mountain. While wandering 
there, the solution, which had been applied on his legs, got washed away. As a 
result, he now became immobile. He started looking all around himself. He 
found numerous Apsaras entertaining the Kinnars, Gandharvas and deities. 
The Brahmin was very much pleased to see the happy atmosphere prevailing 
all around Himalaya. He thought of going back to his place but was 
unsuccessful, as the medicinal solution had been washed. He became very 
sad. An Apsara by the name of Varudhini saw him in a miserable condition. 
She became infatuated by him. When she went near him, he asked- 'Who are 
you? Who is your husband? What are you doing here?' After this, he narrated 
his own story and said- 'I had come from Aruna nagar to see the Himalaya. But 
I am unable to return home as the medicinal solution, which was applied on 
my legs has been washed. Varudhini told the Brahmin that she was an Apsara. 
She also expressed her deep love towards the Brahmin. She requested the 
Brahmin to stay there and not to go back home. She assured him if he did, as 
per her instructions then he would enjoy an eternal youth. He would never 

583 
 



become old. Varudhini forcibly tried to embrace the Brahmin. This made the 
Brahmin very angry. 
He said- 'Varudhini! The sacred scriptures prohibit a Brahmin from indulging in 
sensual pleasures because it gives sorrow not only in this world but also after 
his death.' But Varudhini was not satisfied by his answers. She threatened to 
give up her life if the Brahmin did not marry her. The Brahmin did not agree. 
The Brahmin purified himself by performing Achaman and began worshipping 
Agni. He said- 'O Agni! You are the root cause of all Karmas. The deities bless 
us with rain only after you are pleased. O Agni! I need your blessings. I want to 
go back home.'  
VARUDHINI'S MODESTY BREACHED  
Markandeya says- 'Agni became pleased by the Brahmin's devotion. Agni 
entered into his body. 
The Brahmin's body illuminated due to Agni's radiance. When Varudhini saw 
this, she was fascinated by the Brahmin's appearance. The Brahmin proceeded 
towards his home. Feeling helpless, Varudhini cursed her fate.' Varudhini had 
once insulted a Gandharva named Kali sometime in the past. Chancing upon 
the opportunity, Kali went to Varudhini take his revenge. He had disguised 
himself as a Brahmin. 
When she saw him, she said- 'I need your protection if you heed to my request 
then you will certainly attain virtuosity. Kali did not want her to know about 
his real identity, so he replied- 'If you really want my protection, then you 
must have your eyes closed while having copulation.' Varudhini agreed. 
HIS MARRIAGE WITYH MANORAMA  
In due course of time, Varudhini became pregnant. She gave birth to a child 
who was named Swarochi. The child was extra-ordinary. In a very short time, 
he became proficient in all the scriptures. One day, young Swarochi saw a 
terrified girl near the Mandar Mountain. When the girl saw Swarochi, she 
pleaded for help. Swarochi assured her and asked about her identity. She said- 
'My name is Manorama.  

584 
 



Once I had made fun of a sage who was doing penance near the Kailash 
Mountain. At that time, two of my companions- Vibhavari and Kalavati were 
also present with me. The sage cursed all three of us. Vibhavari and Kalavati 
got inflicted with leprosy and tuberculosis due to his curse. Even I was not 
spared. I am being chased by a ferocious demon since then. I need your 
protection from that demon. I am giving you this very powerful weapon with 
which you can successfully kill the demon.' Swarochi took the weapon. During 
the conversation between Swarochi and Manorama, a demon arrived just 
then. The demon wanted to devour Manorama. Swarochi was confused, as he 
did not want the sage's curse to go futile. He allowed the demon to get hold of 
Manorama, who then started wailing. Hearing her wail, Swarochi thought of 
killing the demon. Becoming afraid, the demon released Manorama from his 
clutches and pleaded Swarochi to spare his life. He then narrated his own 
story. He said- 'You have rescued me from sage Brahmamitra's curse. Actually, 
my name is Indivaraksha. I had requested Brahmamitra to teach him the 
nuances of Ayurveda, which he refused. I decided to learn Ayurveda while 
sage Brahmamitra taught his disciples by hiding myself. One day, the sage 
came to know of this. He cursed me to become a demon. I begged for his 
forgiveness. He said- 'Whatever I have said will definitely come true. You will 
certainly become a demon. After becoming a demon, you will try to devour 
your own daughter but would regain your original form of Gandharva due to 
the touch of Astranal weapon with which you would be attacked. O great soul! 
Since you have liberated me from the curse, therefore, I hand over this girl to 
you. Accept her as your wife. I will also bestow the knowledge of Ayurveda, 
which I had learnt from sage Brahmamitra.' Manorama requested Swarochi to 
cure her companions from the diseases they were suffering from. Swarochi 
assured Manorama that he would certainly cure her companions with the help 
of Ayurveda, which the demon had taught him. Both Swarochi and Manorama 
got married. 
Swarochi then went to her companions and cured them from their diseases. 
SWAROCHI'S OTHER MARRIAGES  

585 
 



Markandeya says- 'After getting cured from their respective diseases, both the 
companions of Manorama expressed their gratitude to Swarochi. Swarochi 
married both Vibhavari as well as Kalavati. To show her gratitude, Vibhavari 
taught Swarochi, a special art that helped him to understand the language of 
all the living creatures. Kalavati on the other hand while narrating her tale, 
said- 'A demon named Ali had asked my hand in marriage from my father but 
my father refused. The demon got angry and killed my father. I wanted to 
commit suicide but Sati; the wife of Shambhu prevented me from doing so by 
saying- ' You would be fortunate to become a wife of great soul Swarochi.'  
SWAROCHI'S REPROACHMENT  
Markandeya says- After getting married, Swarochi started living happily along 
with all his three wives at Malaya Mountain. One day, impressed by the 
mutual love, Swarochi and his wives had for each other, a female ruddy goose 
told another one- 'Very rarely are found such couples who have love for each 
other.' But the other female ruddy goose did not agree. She replied- 'You are 
wrong. Swarochi is not a blessed man. Actually, he deceives all of his three 
wives. Even his love for all the three wives is varied. When one wife is desirous 
of his love, he embraces the other wife. So where is the question of having 
mutual love for one another? In comparison, my husband and I are blessed 
because we have mutual love and respect for each other.' Swarochi, who was 
listening to their conversation, realised how true the ruddy goose was. But 
still, he did not change his ways and continued to live with his wives for 100 
years. One day while wandering, Swarochi saw a deer surrounded by a herd of 
doe. One of the doe on having a desire to copulate with the deer started 
sniffing him in anticipation. But the deer became angry and said- 'Do you think 
I am as shameless as Swarochi? A man, who is sought by numerous beauties, 
his condition becomes laughable. Not only does the daily routine of such a 
man gets disturbed, but also his behaviour is never fair towards his wives.' 
THE ORIGIN OF SWAROCHISH MANU Markandeya says- 'Swarochi became 
very sad after hearing the deer's utterances. He realised how lowly and mean 
he had become. He decided to renounce life after abandoning his wives. 

586 
 



But this did not happen because as soon as he met them, he forgot everything 
about renunciation. 
He continued to live with his wives. In due course of time, Swarochi begot 
three sons- Vijay, Merunand and Prabhav. Swarochi ordered the construction 
of three cities for his sons, which he donated to each of them. The city 
situated towards the east was given to Vijay while the city situated towards 
the north named Nandvati was given to Merunand. The city named Tal, which 
was situated in the south, was given to Prabhav. 
Swarochi then lived happily with his wives. One day, Swarochi had gone for 
hunting. He saw a wild boar and adjusted his arrow on the bowstring to kill it. 
Just then, a doe arrived and requested him to kill her instead of killing that 
boar. She said- 'Kill me with your arrow so that I get liberated from my 
sorrows. I don't want to live because I have become infatuated with such a 
'person' whose heart lies somewhere else. My aspirations remain unfulfilled. 
So death is my only refuge.' Swarochi was very much amazed. He asked- 'Who 
is that fellow?' The doe replied- 'It is nobody than you.' Swarochi was puzzled, 
'How can this be? I am a man whereas you are an animal.' The doe then 
requested Swarochi to embrace her, which Swarochi agreed to do. As soon as 
Swarochi embraced that doe, she got transformed into a beautiful lady. 
Swarochi was very much astonished but the doe said that- 'Don't get puzzled. I 
am the presiding deity of this forest. I have come to seek your help on the 
request of the deities. It is your duty to help me in giving birth to a son named 
Manu. Swarochi married her and in course of time, she gave birth to a son. 
The whole atmosphere became joyous and happy at the birth of that child. 
Gandharvas started singing songs and the Apsaras danced. The deities 
showered flowers from heaven. The child was so radiant that all the four 
directions became illuminated by his brilliance. Swarochi named this child as 
Dyutiman. This child was later on also known as Swarochish, the son of 
Swarochi. One day, while wandering, Swarochi saw a swan who was telling his 
wife- 'Now, we have become old, so what is the use of remaining attached to 
each other. Its time, we must seriously start thinking of renouncing life.' But 

587 
 



his wife said- 'This world is meant for enjoying sensual pleasures. Even the 
Brahmins perform Yagyas with that purpose in their mind. All the virtuous 
people indulge in virtuous activities with the sole desire of experiencing the 
pleasures of life. 
How come the idea of renunciation has entered your mind?' The swan replied- 
'One who is not attracted towards sensual pleasures is totally devoted to God. 
One who is attached by worldly matters can never reach God. Have you not 
seen the state of Swarochi? How can he be liberated from the sorrows of the 
world if he is not even willing to shun the attachments? I am not like 
Swarochi. I know that after enjoying a fully satisfied life, this is the time to 
renounce everything.' After hearing this, Swarochi was very much ashamed of 
himself. He decided to do penance. His wives also accompanied him. All of 
them ultimately went to heaven by the virtue of their penance. 
SWAROCHISH MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says- 'During this Swarochish Manavantar, Indra was famously 
known as Vipaschit. 
The other deities were known as Paravat and Tushit. The names of the 
SaptaRishis who lived during this Manavantar were Urja, Stamb, Pran, Dutt, 
Ali, Rishabh, Nischar and Arvaveera. 
Swarochish Manu had seven sons who were very mighty and brave. Chaitra 
and Kimpurusha were two of them. The descendants of Swarochish ruled the 
earth till the end of this Manavantar. 
Kraustuki asked- 'O lord! Tell me about the treasures of this world.' 
Markandeya replied- 'Goddess Lakshmi is the presiding deity of learning 
(Vidya) called Padmini. After getting perfection in this Vidya, a man becomes 
the master of eight types of treasures- Padma, Mahapadma, Makar, 
Kacchupp, Mukunda, Nandak, Neel and Shankh. The treasure called Padma is 
pure in nature. A man who becomes the master of this treasure mainly deals 
in things like gold and silver etc. Not only he, but also his descendants derive 
benefits from this particular treasure. A person who is the master of 

588 
 



Mahapadma deals in things like pearls, corals etc. This particular treasure does 
not abandon a man till his seventh generation. The treasure called Makar is 
Tamasik in nature. A man who is the master of this particular treasure is 
basically Tamasik by nature. Such a man has mastery in handling over various 
weapons like swords, bows and arrows etc. This particular wealth remains 
with a man only for one generation. 
The treasure called Kacchupp is also Tamasik in nature. A master of this 
particular treasure enjoys all the pleasure of this world and he does not trust 
any person easily. This treasure also remains with a man only for one 
generation. The treasure called Mukunda comprises of Rajas quality. A master 
of this treasure becomes proficient in four types of musical instruments like 
Veena, Venu, Mridang etc. Such a man earns lot of money by exhibiting his 
art. The treasure called Nandak is a combination of Rajas and Tamas qualities. 
A man who gets influences by this treasure becomes immobile. Such a man 
deals in things like metals, jewels, cereals etc. The master of this treasure is 
very benevolent and kind hearted. This particular treasure remains with a man 
till the seventh generation. The treasure called Neel is also a combination of 
Rajas and Satva qualities. A master of this treasure deals in things like clothes, 
cotton, pearls, fruits, flowers and things made from wood. This particular 
treasure remains with a man till three generations. A possessor of this 
treasure is a great social worker and constructs bridge, ponds etc. The 
treasure called Shankh comprises of Rajas and Tamas qualities. Only one 
person can master this particular treasure. Such a man enjoys good food and 
is fond of wearing expensive clothes. 
Normally, this type of man does not give shelter to other people and is 
constantly thinking of his own betterment. '  
AUTTAM MANVANTAR  
KING UTTAM ABANDONS HIS WIFE  
Kraustuki says- 'O lord! Now tell me about the Auttam Manavantar.' 
Markandeya replied- 'Uttanpada and Suruchi had a son named Uttam. Uttam 

589 
 



was married to Bahula. Bahula did not love Uttam and always showed 
disrespect towards him. One day, while both of them were sitting in the court, 
watching the proceedings, Uttam offered a betel leaf to Bahula which she 
refused, King Uttam felt dishonored. He ordered his attendant to abandon the 
queen in the forest. Bahula too was very happy, thinking that now she will not 
have to be in the company of Uttam. This way, Bahula was taken to the forest. 
One day, a sad Brahmin came to Uttam and said- 'O king! Somebody has 
abducted my wife. I need your help in finding out my lost wife. Uttam asked 
the Brahmin about the nature, physical construction and about the age of his 
wife. The Brahmin revealed all the facts related with his wife. The king was not 
impressed. The facts, which the Brahmin had furnished, went to prove that his 
wife was not a chaste lady. The king expressed his view about his wife in so 
many words. He said- 'What is the use of having such a wicked wife? Forget 
about her. I will give you another one with all the good qualities.' The Brahmin 
replied- 'O king! It is one's duty to protect one's wife no matter how wicked 
she may be. By protecting your wife, your children also get protected. A man 
who does not protect his wife, has a son of hybrid class. His ancestors are 
degraded from the heaven because of such type of sons. I am not able to 
perform my religious obligations because of the absence of my wife. O king! 
Please help me.' While searching the Brahmin's wife, King Uttam saw a sage at 
a secluded place. When the sage saw King Uttam, he wanted to offer some 
Ardhya (some type of offering) to him, which his disciples prohibited him from 
doing. Then, the sage changed his mind and offered his seat to the king. The 
king asked about the reason why he changed his mind of offering the Ardhya. 
The sage replied- 'Though you are the descendant of Swayambhu Manu, but 
since you have committed a grave sin by abandoning your wife, I decided that 
you are not fit to be offered the Ardhya. No matter how mean your wife is, it 
is your duty to protect her at all costs.' King Uttam was very ashamed of 
himself. He asked the sage about the whereabouts of the Brahmin's wife. 

590 
 



The sage replied- 'His wife has been abducted by the demon, Balak- the son of 
Adri. He has kept her in the forest called Utpalavat. Go and help the Brahmin 
to meet his wife so that he doesn't commit a grave sin like you. 
BRAHMIN'S WIFE RETURNS HOME 
Markandeya says- 'When King Uttam reached Utpalavat forest, he saw a 
woman eating a Sriphal fruit. The king asked that woman whether she was the 
wife of that Brahmin- Susharma. The woman replied in the affirmative and 
said- 'The demon abducted me while I was sleeping. Since that day, he has 
kept me here. I am very afraid of that demon.' The king then asked the woman 
about the demon's whereabouts. The woman pointed towards the direction 
of the demon's path. 
The king went in that direction. 
When the demon saw the king approaching him, he bowed down in reverence 
and said- 'O king! What can I do for you?' The king asked- 'Why have you 
abducted the wife of this Brahmin.' The demon replied- 'I am not the demon 
who devours human beings. I devour their 'flaws'. I have many beautiful 
wives. So where is the need of aspiring for another woman? Actually, the 
Brahmin is a very learned man and has mastered the mantras. By chanting 
Rakshodna mantras during oblations, he has increased my hunger by making 
incantations. Therefore, I have abducted his wife to prevent him from 
accomplishing any Yagya.' The king became very sad. He thought- 'What a 
grave sin I have committed by abandoning my wife! Earlier, that sage too did 
not find me fit for giving Ardhya. Now, this demon is also aware of the 
importance of one's wife in religious ceremonies. How cruel I have been to my 
wife.' The demon told the king- 'O king! What should I do for you?' The king 
replied- 'Devour the flaws of this woman so that she becomes humble. After 
that, carry her back home. The demon acted as per the instructions of King 
Uttam. As a result, the Brahmin's wife became very humble. She said to the 
king- 'It seems, there is no fault of this demon. Perhaps, I must have caused 
separation between a husband and wife, in my previous life and for that very 
reason, I was forced to suffer this separation with my husband in this present 

591 
 



life. The demon said- 'O king! What else do you want from me? The king said- 
'You must be present before me whenever I remember you.' The demon 
agreed. He carried the Brahmin's wife to her home. 
THE SAGE AND KING UTTAM AND BIRTH OF AUTTAM MANU  
Markandeya says- 'King Uttam wondered as to what should he do to get 
liberated from the sins of abandoning his wife. He requested the sage to help 
him in this regard. The sage informed the king that his wife was living at 
Ranatal. The king of the serpents- Kapotak is looking after her. 
Kapotak has a daughter named Nanda. Being concerned about her mother's 
future, Nanda had hidden your wife. The sage became very furious and cursed 
her. As a result, she became dumb. 
Uttam, your wife was always a chaste woman. It was only due to evil 
influences of the planets that she was not paying adequate attention to you. 
Now, you should go and take her back to your home. Uttam returned back to 
his palace.' Markandeya says- 'Uttam met the Brahmin and told him that now 
as he had reunited with his wife, it was now his turn to help him (king) to re-
unite with his wife. The Brahmin assured Uttam that he would perform a 
Yagya named Mitravinda, which would help him to achieve his goal. He 
requested Uttam to bring his wife so that the Yagya could be performed. 
Uttam remembered Nisachar, a demon and requested him to bring his wife. 
Nisachar went to Patal loka and brought his wife. The queen was very happy 
to see her husband once again. She requested him to cure Nanda who had 
become dumb for no fault of hers. Saraswat Japa was chanted to cure Nanda. 
When Nanda regained her voice, she came to the oblation site and after 
embracing the queen, blessed her by saying that she would become a proud 
mother of a very famous son named Manu. After that, she went back to Patal 
loka. In due course of time, the queen gave birth to a son who was named 
Auttam by the sages. '  
AUTTAM MANVANTAR  

592 
 



Markandeya says- 'O sage! The following Ganas who reigned during Auttam 
Manavantar are very famous. They are the first Gana- Swadhama. The second 
Gana Satya was related with the deities. The third Gana was Shiva, the fourth 
was named Pratardan and the fifth Gana was Vashvarti. Each of the Ganas are 
the master of twelve deities. Indra by the name of Sushanti rules all the three 
worlds by the virtue of accomplishing one hundred Ashwamedha Yagyas. He 
along with Shiva and Satya etc. bestows peace to the world. The descendants 
of Auttam ruled the whole earth for the full period of Auttam Manavantar. 
The SaptaRishis during this Auttam Manavantar were the sons of sage 
Mahatapa. The description of this third Manavantar is now complete. Now I 
am going to tell you about the fourth Manavantar, which is also known as 
Tamas Manavantar. '  
TAMAS MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says- 'There used to live a king named Swarashtra. The deity 
Surya had blessed him with a long life. The king had one hundred wives, but 
they were not as lucky as he was as far as enjoying a long life was concerned. 
One by one, all of them died. A king from the neighbouring state named 
Vimard defeated him in a battle. After being defeated, Swarashtra went at the 
bank of river Vitasta and started doing penance. 
One day, it rained heavily and the king was swept by the ferocious current. 
The drowning king saw a doe and held her tail to save his life. The doe told the 
king that she was aware about the lust of the king. She also told her that her 
pregnancy was causing hindrance in making love. The king was amazed. He 
asked as to how she could speak like a human being despite of being an 
animal. The doe replied that she was his most beloved queen Mahishi in her 
previous life. She had killed a pair of deer while they were making love. The 
doe had died but the deer survived. 
He had cursed her to become a doe in her next life. The deer also revealed to 
the queen that she would give birth to the mighty Lola. The same Lola would 
later on become famous as Manu after defeating his father's enemies. The 

593 
 



king was very pleased at this. In due course of time, the doe gave birth to a 
son after which she went to the heaven. The sages named the son Tamas. 
When Tamas became young, he did penance to please Surya. Surya gave him 
many weapons by the help of which Tamas was able to defeat all his enemies. 
He brought all the enemies in front of his father but Swarashtra forgave 
everybody. He gave his kingdom to Tamas. 
Markandeya says- 'Tamas ruled over the whole earth. Four types of deities 
were famous during this Manavantar- Satya Gana, Sudhi Gana, Surup Gana 
and Hari Gana. Indra was known as Shikhi during this Manavantar. The names 
of these SaptaRishis who lived during this Manavantar were Jyotirdharma, 
Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, Balak and Peevar. The sons of Tamas Manu were 
very mighty. Their names were Nar, Kshanti, Shant, Dant, Jahnu and Jangha 
etc. 
RAIVAT MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says- 'Now I am going to tell you about Raivat Manu. His father 
was Ritvak. Raivat was born in Revati Nakshatra. Later on, he became 
infamous for his loose character. His father was very worried about him. 
Ritvak asked sage Garg as to how such a mean child had been born to him. 
Sage Garg replied- 'The negative qualities of your son is due to his birth in 
Revati Nakshatra. Ritvak became very furious with Revati Nakshatra and 
cursed it as a result of which, Revati Nakshatra fell down on Kumud Mountain. 
All the four directions became illuminated and a reservoir was created. A girl 
manifested from that reservoir. A sage named Pramauchi brought that girl to 
his hermitage and named her as Revati. When the girl became young, the sage 
was very worried about her marriage. One day, Hutashan revealed to him that 
she would get married to Durgam, the eldest son of Swayambhu Manu. One 
day Durgam arrived at Pramauchi's hermitage. He saw Revati and asked her- 
'O beautiful lady! Can you tell me where sage Pramauchi is? I have come here 
to pay my obeisance to him. At that time, sage Pramauchi was busy 

594 
 



performing his Yagya. Hearing his voice, he came out. Seeing Durgam at his 
hermitage, he instructed his disciple, Gautam to bring Ardhya for him. 
The sage said- 'Durgam is not only a king but also my son-in-law.' Durgam was 
very surprised at what sage Pramauchi had said. He asked sage Pramauchi as 
to how could he be his son-in-law and who was his wife? The sage replied- 
'Your wife is none other than the girl whom you met sometime earlier. Her 
name is Revati. Then the sage narrated the whole story how sage Garg had 
prophesised about Revati's marriage with Durgam.' Durgam started 
contemplating on this peculiar situation. 
Sage Pramauchi started to make arrangements for the marriage. When Revati 
saw the arrangements being made for her marriage, she requested him to get 
her married in Revati Nakshatra. Sage Pramauchi revealed to her that this 
particular Nakshatra did not exist in the sky any more. Revati then requested 
him to establish this Nakshatra in the sky. Sage Pramauchi reestablished 
Revati Nakshatra in the sky by the help of his divine powers. Thus, Revati and 
Durgam got married. After getting married, Durgam requested the sage to 
bless him with a mighty son. Sage Pramauchi blessed him. After sometime, 
Revati gave birth to Raivat Manu. 
Raivat Manu was proficient in all the scriptures. The chief Ganas of Raivat 
Manavantar were Sumedha, Bhupati, Vaikunth and Amitabhaichar. There 
were fourteen deities present in each of the Ganas. The presiding deity of 
these deities was Indra by the name of Vibhu. The SaptaRishis present during 
this Manavantar were Hiranyaroma, VedSri, Urdhvabahu, Vedbahu, Sudhama, 
Mahamuni, Paryanya and Vashishta. Raivat Manu had four sons- Balabandhu, 
Mahaveerya, Suyastanya and Satyak. 
CHAKSHUSH MANVANTAR  
Chakshush had manifested from the eye (Chakshu) of Lord Brahma in his 
previous birth. For this reason, he was known as Chakshush. Chakshush was 
born to Anmitra and Giribhadra. After taking birth, he was abducted by 
Jatharini and exchanged with the son of King Vikrant who was sleeping 

595 
 



besides his mother. Being unaware of this event, Vikrant considered him as his 
own son and named him as Anand. When Anand grew up, once, his Guru 
instructed him to make salutations to his mother. Anand replied- "To whom 
should I make salutations? The one who has given birth to me or to the one 
who has brought me up and nurtured me? The Guru was surprised by his 
reply. He said- "O son! Haimini, the wife of Vikrant has given birth to you and 
so, she is your mother. But Anand replied back- "This woman is not my 
mother. 
I have taken birth from somebody else's womb. This woman is the mother of 
Chaitra. I am the son of Anmitra and Giribhadra. Jatharini had abducted me 
and brought me here. She had also carried Chaitra to Punarva's place and kept 
him over there. Jatharini had devoured the son of Punarva. Now tell me, who 
is my mother and to whom should I make salutations?" The Guru became 
confused, so were the king and the queen. Anand went to the forest and 
started doing penance. Prajapati became pleased by his tremendous penance 
and appeared before him. He said- "O son! What makes you undertake such a 
severe penance? Anand replied- "O lord! I am doing this penance with the 
purpose of becoming free from all the bondage of my Karma and to purify 
myself. Brahma said- "Only the mortal men are fit to become liberated 
because they are bound by their Karmas but you being a virtuous person are 
not bound by your Karmas. With my blessings, you would become the sixth 
Manu. There is no need for you to do penance. 
Lord Brahma named him as Chakshush. Later on, he became famous as 
Chakshush Manu. When Chakshush Manu attained marriageable age, he 
married Vidarbha, the daughter of Ugra. Markandeya says- "Apya was the 
most prominent Gana of Chakshush Manavantar. He was the master of eight 
deities. 
The second Gana was called Prasoot. He too was the master of eight deities. 
Similarly, there were two more Ganas- Bhatyakhya and Uthaga. Each of them 
was the master of eight deities. The presiding deity of these deities was Indra 
by the name of Manojav. The SaptaRishis present during this Manavantar 

596 
 



were Sumedha, Viraja, Havishman, Unnat, Madhu, Ati and Sahishnu. 
Chakshush had many mighty sons like Uru, Kuru, Shatadryumna etc. Now I am 
going to tell you about the seventh Manu who was called Vaivasvat."  
 
VAIVASVAT MANVANTAR  
THE BIRTH OF ASHWINI KUMARS AND REVANT  
Markandeya says- 'The Manu of Vaivasvat Manavantar was famously known 
as Vaivasvat as he was the son of Vivasvan (Surya). Surya was married to 
Sangya- the daughter of Vishwakarma. 
Although, she had borne two sons (Vaivasvat and Yama) and a daughter 
(Yami) from Surya, yet the radiance of Surya was too much for her to bear. So, 
one day, she created a shadow identity of herself and requested it to act as if 
she was the real Sangya. She said to the shadow- 'As long as your identity 
remains unknown, I would not reveal myself.' After this Sangya went back to 
her father's home and ultimately to Uttarkuru where she started doing 
penance in the guise of a mare. Surya on the other hand was not aware of 
Sangya's doings. 
In due course of time, the shadow of Sangya gave birth to many children. 
Though she loved her own children, she never had the same attitude towards 
the three sons of Sangya. Seeing her discriminatory attitude, Yama tried to 
kick her with his leg. The shadow of Sangya became furious. She cursed 
Yama's leg to get severed from his body. Yama became very scared. He went 
to his father Surya accompanied by Vaivasvat and Yami. 
He told Surya- 'A mother can never curse her own child. So, this woman is 
certainly not our mother because she has cursed me.' Surya called the shadow 
of Sangya and asked about her true identity but Sangya's shadow kept mum. 
Seeing her quiet, Surya became very angry and he held her by her hair and 
was just about to curse her when, out of fear, she revealed the whole story. 
Surya went to the place of his father-in-law, Vishwakarma and asked about 
Sangya. 

597 
 



Vishwakarma feigned ignorance. He said- 'She did come but she had returned 
to your place after staying here for a while.' Vishwakarma knew the reason 
why Sangya had abandoned her husband. So, he subdued the radiance of 
Surya. 
THE SAGES OF SAVARNIK MANVANTAR Kraustuki says- 'O revered sage! You 
have already enlightened me by revealing the names of seven different Manus 
of each Manavantar. You have also told me about the deities, the kings and 
the sages who existed during each Manavantar. Now, I am curious to know 
about the seven Manus, the deities and the sages of this Kalpa.' Markandeya 
says- 'Savarni, the son of Sangya's shadow would be the eighth Manu. The 
SaptaRishis of Savarni Manavantar would be Rama, Vyasa, Galav, Diptiman, 
Krip, RishyaSring and Drauni (Ashwatthama). The three main categories of 
deities existing during this Manavantar would be Sutapa, Amitabh and 
Mukhya. Each of them is the master of 20 Ganas. Among these, the Ganas- 
Prabhakar, Prabhas, Dathita, Dharma, Tejah, Rashmi and Vakratu come under 
the authority of the deity, Sutapa. Similarly, the deity Amitabh is the master of 
the Ganas like Prabhu, Vibhu and Vibhas etc. The deity Mukhya is the Lord of 
Ganas like Dama, Dant, Rit, Soma and Vint. All of them are the offspring of 
sage Kashyapa. They will become famous as the deities of Savarni 
Manavantar. Bali, the son of Virochan would hold the post of Indra during this 
Manavantar. Virja, Arvaveera, Nirmoha, Satyavak, Kriti and Vishnu will be the 
sons of Savarni Manu.' KILLING OF MADHU KAITABHA Markandeya says- 'King 
Surath was the descendant of Chaitra. He was defeated in the battle against 
King Kolvidhvansi. All his wealth was deceitfully taken over by his cunning 
ministers. 
King Surath fled to the forest to save his life where he met a sage named 
Medha. He stayed with him at his hermitage but after a while, the thought of 
his lost kingdom began to torment him. One day, while he was roaming near 
the hermitage, he met a Vaishya named Samadhi. Samadhi narrated his 
woeful story as to how his sons had driven him out of his home after taking all 
his wealth. But inspite of this, his love for them remained intact. Both Surath 

598 
 



and Samadhi went to sage Medha and told him that- 'Inspite of our miserable 
condition, we are unable to understand why we still have affection and love 
for our near and dear ones even though they have cheated us.' Sage Medha 
replied- 'O king! Due to the illusions of this world, human beings are deeply 
influenced by attachments. So, there is nothing to be amazed. Goddess 
Mahamaya influences the mind of each human being. She does not spare 
even the most learned one. When she becomes pleased, she bestows 
liberation.' The king asked- 'Who is this Mahamaya? Please tell us about her.' 
Sage Medha then told them about Mahamaya- 'O king! Goddess Mahamaya is 
beyond the reach of origin and destruction. When the whole earth was 
submerged in water at the end of the Kalpa, Lord Vishnu took refuge of 
Yoganidra. While He was sleeping, two demons, Madhu and Kaitabh 
manifested from the wax of his ears. The demons wanted to attack Brahma. 
Lord Brahma got scared and sought help from Goddess Nidra. She manifested 
from the body of Lord Vishnu and appeared before Lord Brahma. Lord Vishnu 
woke up from his sleep. He saw that the demons were trying to kill Lord 
Brahma. He fought with both the demons for 5,000 years. 
Goddess Mahamaya influenced the demons' minds as a result of which, they 
asked some boons from Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu granted the boons to them 
and said- 'Both of you will get killed by me.' The demons said- 'We are ready 
to get killed on the condition that you kill us only in such a place where there 
is no water.' As the whole earth was submerged in water, so the demons 
thought that Lord Vishnu would not be able to get a base to kill them. But 
Lord Vishnu severed their heads after making them sit on His thighs. 
THE DESTRUCTION OF MAHISHASURA'S ARMY Markandeya says- 'During 
ancient times, the deities and the demons fought a fierce battle which lasted 
for a hundred years. The deities were defeated in this battle. Mahishasura 
drove out the deities from heaven and ascended the throne of Indra. The 
defeated deities went to seek the help of Lord Brahma, Vishnu and Mahadeva. 
They narrated their woeful tale to all the three deities. 

599 
 



Brahma, Vishnu and Mahadeva became furious at the demons' cruelty. A 
powerful effulgence appeared from the mouth of Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahadeva. Similar effulgence appeared from the bodies of all the deities. The 
super effulgence was created from the unison of all these effulgence and a 
Goddess manifested from it. The deities were very pleased. All the deities 
presented their weapons to the Goddess. After this, they hailed her name in a 
loud voice by chanting- 'Victory be to her.' The Goddess laughed loudly. Her 
laughter shook the whole earth violently. 
When Mahishasura heard her laughter, he proceeded towards her 
accompanied by a huge army. 
When he reached there, he was amazed at the appearance of the Goddess. He 
attacked her with his army, which boasted of mighty warriors like Chamar, 
Chikshur, Udagra, Asilom, Mahahanu, Vashkal, Parivarit, Vidal and Kal. These 
demons had dangerous weapons like Tomar, Shakti, axe, mace etc. One by 
one, the Goddess destroyed all the demons' weapons and launched an attack 
on them. The deep exhalations made during the battle resulted into the 
creation of numerous Ganas. These Ganas joined the Goddess in the battle. 
Ultimately, the Goddess succeeded in killing all the demons. 
The battlefield was covered by demons' corpses as well as carcasses of 
elephants and horses. The deities were pleased by the outcome of this battle. 
THE DEITIES EULOGISE GODDESS BHAGVATI Markandeya says- 'After the 
killing of Mahishasura, all the deities including Indra eulogised Goddess 
Bhagvati and said- 'We make salutations to her who has manifested herself as 
a result of the unison of the powers of all the deities, one who is revered by all 
the deities and the sages. 
May she bless us. We make salutations to that Goddess whose powers are 
indescribable even by Lord Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh. O Goddess! Please 
nurture the whole world with your love and care. We find ourselves incapable 
of describing your grandeur and magnificence.' Goddess Bhagvati became 
very pleased with their devotion and asked them to demand any boon. 

600 
 



But the deities replied- 'O Goddess! By killing Mahishasura, you have already 
fulfilled our aspirations. If you really want to bless us, then please appear 
before us at the time of our need. 
The Goddess blessed them by saying- 'So be it'. 
Markandeya says- 'Now, I am going to tell you how Goddess Bhagvati 
protected the deities by killing the demons- Shumbh and Nishumbh.' 
GODDESS PARVATI AND SHUMBH'S MESSENGER Markandeya says- 'During 
ancient times, the demons- Shumbh and Nishumbh had captured all the three 
worlds after defeating the deities. The deities went to Goddess Parvati and 
eulogised her by saying- 'O Goddess! You had promised us that you would 
come to our help at the time of our need. The time has arrived.' As the deities 
were busy eulogising Goddess Parvati, she was preparing to go for her bath. 
She came near the deities and asked them as to who were they eulogising. 
Suddenly, a divine entity manifested from her body and answered on behalf of 
the deities- 'These deities are eulogising me.' This divine entity was none 
other than Goddess Shiva. As Shiva had manifested from the cell (Koshika) of 
Parvati's body, she was also known as Kaushiki. Kaushiki possessed divine 
beauty. The demons, Chand and Mund happened to see her. 
Both of them went to Shumbh and described to him about Kaushiki's beauty. 
Shumbh wanted to marry her. He sent a messenger named Sugreev to 
Kaushiki to inform her about his intentions. 
Sugreev went to Kaushiki and said- 'You are so beautiful. You are fit to marry a 
mighty demon king like Shumbh who rules over all the three worlds.' The 
Goddess laughed and said- 'O messenger! I am ready to marry Shumbh or 
Nishumbh because I know they are very powerful but there is one problem. As 
I have taken a vow that I would marry only such a person who defeats me in a 
battle.' The messenger replied- 'O beautiful lady! How can you fight the 
mighty Shumbh who has defeated even the deities and who is the master of 
all the three worlds?' Sugreev made persistent requests but the Goddess 
refused to go along with him. She instructed him to inform Shumbh and 
Nishumbh about her vow. 

601 
 



KILLING OF DHUMRALOCHAN Markandeya says- 'Sugreev went back to 
Shumbh and narrated the whole story. Shumbh became very furious and 
instructed Dhumralochan to bring her by force. Dhumralochan went to 
Goddess Bhagvati accompanied by 60,000 demons. Initially, he requested her 
to come along with him. He also threatened to take her forcibly if she did not 
accept her proposal. Goddess Bhagvati refused to go along with him. 
Dhumralochan angrily ran towards her. The Goddess made a loud roar as a 
result of which, Dhumralochan's body was reduced to ashes. After his death, 
Dhumralochan's army attacked Goddess Bhagvati. The mount of the Goddess- 
Simha killed all the demons. When Shumbh got the news of Dhumralochan's 
death, his anger knew no bounds. He instructed Chand and Mund to go and 
bring Goddess Bhagvati after capturing her. 
KILLING OF CHAND AND MUNDChand and Mund proceeded with a huge army. 
At that time, Goddess Bhagvati had positioned herself at the peak of Himachal 
Mountain. She was mounted on the back of Simha and was smiling sweetly. 
Chand and Mund tried to enslave her but suddenly, Goddess Kali appeared 
from her mouth and ferociously attacked the demons. She devoured some of 
them and killed the rest. 
After seeing his huge army vanquished, Chand angrily ran towards Goddess 
Kali. Mund attacked her with a range of arrows, which infuriated Goddess Kali 
and she pulled Chand by his hair and severed his head by a sword. Seeing him 
fall to the ground, Mund ran towards Goddess Kali but even he was killed. The 
rest of the army retreated. After killing Chand and Mund, Goddess Kali told 
Goddess Bhagvati- 'I have done my duty. I have killed Chand and Mund. Now 
you should do the same by killing Shumbh and Nishumbh.' Goddess Bhagvati 
replied- 'Since you have killed the demons, Chand and Mund from now 
onwards, you will also become famous as Chandika.' KILLING OF RAKTABEEJ 
Markandeya says- 'When Shumbh got the news of Chand and Mund' s death, 
he became very furious. He proceeded to fight Goddess Bhagvati 
accompanied by numerous mighty warriors like Udayudh, Kambu, Kotiveerya, 
Dhumravanashajat, Kalak, Kalkeya etc. When Goddess Chandika saw them 

602 
 



coming, she made a loud sound by pulling the bowstring. The demons came 
near and surrounded Goddess Chandika and Goddess Bhagvati from all the 
sides. Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva and Lord Vishnu became anxious. They created 
divine entities with the help of effulgence emanating from their bodies. These 
divine entities resembled Goddess Chandika. They instructed these divine 
entities to kill all the demons. Goddess Chandika requested Lord Shiva to 
approach Shumbh and Nishumbh as her messenger and inform him that they 
should either take refuge in the Patal loka or be ready to die. Lord Mahadeva 
went to the place where Katyayani was fighting the demons. The demons 
attacked her with different weapons but Chandika gave them a befitting reply. 
Unable to face the assault of the Goddesses, the demons started fleeing. 
Seeing this, Raktabeej came forward to fight. Raktabeej was blessed with a 
boon that was if a single drop of his blood fell on the ground, this drop would 
create another form of his. This way, in a very short time, thousands of 
Raktabeejas covered the battlefield. The deities became afraid. 
Seeing the frightened deities, Bhagvati said to Kali- 'O Chamunda! Open your 
mouth and drink each drop of blood coming out from the injuries of 
Raktabeej.' After saying this, Goddess Bhagvati attacked Raktabeej with her 
trident. Goddess Kali drank all the blood coming out from his wound. At last, 
Raktabeej was killed. The deities were pleased. Goddess Kali started to dance 
with ferocity due to the intoxication caused by drinking of the blood. 
KILLING OF NISHUMBH Markandeya says- 'When Shumbh and Nishumbh 
heard about Raktabeej's death, they were infuriated. Nishumbh attacked the 
Goddess with a huge army. Shumbh attacked from the other side. In the fierce 
battle, Goddess Bhagvati broke the sword as well as the shield of Nishumbh. 
Nishumbh then attacked Goddess Bhagvati with his weapon- Shakti. Goddess 
Bhagvati broke it with her Chakra. At last, she attacked him with her arrows at 
him and as a result, Nishumbh got injured and fell. ' When Shumbh saw 
Nishumbh, injured and unconscious, he ran towards Goddess Bhagvati to kill 
her. Goddess Bhagvati blew her conch and made a thunderous noise by 
pulling the bowstring. 

603 
 



Shumbh released the dangerous weapon- Ugradipti in the direction of 
Goddess Bhagvati. But her weapon Maholkanamni destroyed it. Shumbh 
thundered loudly and attacked Goddess Bhagvati with a volley of arrows but 
none could cause any harm to her. Finally, Goddess Bhagvati attacked Shumbh 
with her trident. Shumbh fell down unconscious. After sometime, he regained 
his consciousness and attacked Goddess Bhagvati with his arrows. But she 
destroyed all the arrows. In the meantime, Nishumbh had regained his 
consciousness. He got up and attacked Goddess Bhagvati with his trident. In 
the end, Goddess Bhagvati killed Nishumbh by piercing her trident in his heart. 
As Nishumbh was dying, an another demon manifested from his body. 
Even he was killed by her. Her mount Simha devoured all the dead demons. 
KILLING OF SHUMBH Markandeya says- 'Shumbh became angry at the death 
of his brother- Nishumbh. He furiously told the Goddess- 'O wicked lady! Do 
not be proud of your strength borrowed from others.' Goddess Bhagvati 
replied- 'O wicked demon! I am the only power of this whole universe. I am 
the origin of cause and effect. Look! All the divinities are entering into my 
body.' The next moment, all the divine entities, which had earlier manifested 
from the bodies of the deities united with the Goddess. Now, the Goddess 
was alone. A tremendous battle was fought between Goddess Bhagvati and 
Shumbh. Ambika attacked him with numerous divine weapons. 
But, Shumbh neutralised her attack with his own weapons. 
Shumbh covered the whole body of Goddess Bhagvati with his arrows. She 
broke his bow. After this, Shumbh attacked her with his weapon named 
Shakti, which was broken into pieces by her Chakra. Now, Shumbh took out 
his sword and attacked her with it. She broke his shield and sword with her 
arrows. Shumbh then attacked her with his mace. Even his mace was broken 
into pieces. 
Shumbh had no more weapons left with him. He attacked the Goddess on her 
breast with his clenched fist. She slapped him on his face because of which he 

604 
 



fell down. The next moment, he got up and manifested himself in the sky. 
Now, a tremendous duel was fought between them in the sky. 
In the end, she dashed him on the ground and pierced the trident in his heart. 
Shumbh was instantly killed. After the killing of Shumbh, all the deities 
became pleased. The Gandharvas and the deities rejoiced. The Apsaras 
danced. The whole atmosphere echoed with the sound- 'Shanti Shanti' (Let 
there be peace). 
DEVI STOTRA Markandeya says- After Goddess Bhagvati had killed Shumbh, all 
the deities under the leadership of Indra and Agni started eulogising her- 'O 
Goddess! Be pleased up on us! Protect the whole world, as you are the 
Goddess of this whole universe. You appear in the form of this earth- the base 
on which everything is situated. Your light illuminates all the living creatures. 
You are the only power through which creation, nurturing and annihilation 
takes place. You are the Brahmani, Maheshwari and the Kaumari. We salute 
you because you have protected us from the terror of the demons. We need 
your protection from all the calamities of this world.' Goddess Bhagvati was 
extremely pleased by their eulogy. She asked them for any wish. The deities 
said- 'O Akhileshwari! We need your protection. Clear all the obstacles from 
our path. 
Eliminate our enemies.' Goddess Bhagvati replied- 'During Vaivasvat 
Manavantar, I will take incarnation from Yashoda's womb- the wife of Nand, 
to kill the demons Shumbh and Nishumbh. After that, I will kill the demon- 
Vaiprachit in my most aggressive form. One hundred years later, I will 
manifest myself and would be known as Satakshi because of my hundred 
eyes. My next incarnation would be known as Shakambhari because I would 
nurture the whole world during the period of drought. 
I will kill the demon Durgam during that drought period. I will kill the demon 
Arun- the tormentor of all the three worlds by appearing in the form of a bee. 
Due to this, I will be known as Bhramari. I will take incarnations every time the 
demons torment the world. 

605 
 



GODDESS BHAGVATI BLESSES THE DEITIES Goddess Bhagvati says- I will clear 
all the obstacles from the path of such a man who worships me. A devotee 
who listens to the great tales of how I killed Mahishasura, Shumbh and 
Nishumbh, on the eighth, ninth and fourteenth days of any month, would be 
liberated from all sins and poverty. He would become free from fear. A 
devotee must listen to my divine tales during all the religious ceremonies like 
making sacrifice, worship and performing Yagya. By doing this, all his enemies 
will be eliminated. A man who remembers me when faced with dangerous 
situation remains protected by me.' After blessing the deities, Goddess 
Bhagvati disappeared from their sight. All the demons, which had survived 
after the killings of Shumbh and Nishumbh, went to the nether world to save 
their lives. 
GODDESS BHAGVATI BLESSES SURATH AND THE VAISHYA The sage says- 'O 
king! I have described in detail about the greatness of Goddess Bhagvati who 
is the creator of this universe. She is the one who bestows the knowledge of 
self to us. She is the Maya (illusion) by whom the whole world is influenced. 
You must take her refuge. You can achieve all the pleasures of this world, 
heaven, as well as liberation.' King Surath and the Vaishya went to do their 
penance. While doing their penance, they chanted the mantras of Devi Sukta. 
They made an earthen idol of Bhagvati and worshipped it by offering flowers, 
Dhup etc. 
They did an austere penance for three years implying various modes of 
worship. Sometimes, they observed fast, the other time, they offered their 
own blood to please Goddess Bhagvati. At last, the Goddess was pleased and 
appeared before them. She said- 'I am pleased with both of you. I will fulfil 
whatever you wish.' King Surath sought her blessings in regaining his kingdom 
from the clutches of his enemies. He also requested her to bless him with an 
undivided kingdom in his next life. The Vaishya requested her to make him 
free from all kinds of attachments. 
Goddess Bhagvati said- 'O king! Very soon, you will be able to regain your 
whole kingdom from your enemies. In your next birth, you would be born as 

606 
 



Savarni Manu, the son of Surya. You will also attain self-knowledge and 
become free from all kinds of attachments.' After blessing both of them, 
Goddess Bhagvati disappeared. 
SAVARN MANVANTAR Markandeya says- 'O great sage! Now I am going to tell 
you about the Manavantar of Savarn, which will be the ninth Manavantar. 
Savarn was the son of Daksha. During this Manavantar, there will be three 
prominent groups of deities. Each group would comprise of twelve deities. 
During this Manavantar, Indra would be known as Adbhut. The names of the 
SaptaRishis of this Manavantar would be Medhatithi, Vasu, Satya, Jyotishman, 
Dyutiman, Sabal and Hatyavahan. 
Savarn will have eight sons- Dhrishtketu, Barhaketu, Panchahasta, Niramay, 
Prithushravah, Achishman, Bhuridruymna and Bhrihadmay.' The tenth 
Manavantar will be named after the tenth Manasputra of Lord Brahma. 
During this Manavantar, the names of two prominent groups of deities will be 
Sukhasin and Niruddha. The total population during this Manavantar will be 
hundred people. The total number of deities during this Manavantar will also 
be of the same number. The name of Indra during this tenth Manavantar 
would be Shanti and the names of the SaptaRishis during this tenth 
Manavantar would be Apomurti, Havishman, Sukrit, Satya, Nabhag, Apratim 
and Vashishta. The tenth Manu would have ten sons- Sukshetra, Uttamoja, 
Bhurishen, Veeryavan, Shatanik, Vrishabh, Anmitra, Jayadrath, Bhuridruymna 
and Suparva. 
The eleventh Manavantar will be named after Savarn, the son of Dharma. 
During this Manavantar, there will be three prominent groups of deities- 
Vihangam, Kamag and Nirmanpati. 
Each group would comprise of 30 deities. Indra would be known by the name 
of Vrishakhya. 
The name of the SaptaRishis of this Manavantar would be Havishman, 
Varishtha, Nischar, Anagh, Vishti, Agnidev etc. The eleventh Manu would have 

607 
 



six sons- Sarvatrag, Susharma, Devaneek, Purudwaha, Hemdhanva and 
Dhridhayu. 
The twelfth Manavantar will be named after Savarn, the son of Rudra. The 
names of the five prominent groups of deities of this Manavantar will be 
Sudharma, Sumana, Harit, Rohit and Suvarn. Each group will comprise of ten 
deities. During this Manavantar, Indra would be known by the name of 
Kratadhama. The names of the SaptaRishis during this Manavantar would be 
Dyuti, Tapasvi, Sutava, Tapomurti, Taponidhi, Taporati and Tapodhiti. The 
Manu of this Manavantar would have six sons- Devavan, Upadev, 
Devashrestha, Vidurath, Mitravan and Mitravinda. 
Rauchya would be the Manu during the thirteen Manavantar. Three 
prominent groups of deities would be Sudharma, Sukarma and Susharma. 
During this Manavantar, Indra would be known by the name of Divaspati. The 
name of the SaptaRishis of this Manavantar will be Dhritiman, Avyay, 
Tatvadarshi, Nirutsuk, Nirmoha, Sutapa and Nishkamp. During this 
Manavantar, Manu would have eight sons- Chitrasen, Vichitra, Niyati, Nirbhay, 
Dhridh, Sunetra, Kshatrabuddhi and Suvrat. 
RAUCHYA MANVANTAR RUCHI ADVISED TO GET MARRIED Markandeya says- 
'As soon as the ancestors departed, a beautiful Apsara came near Ruchi. Her 
name was Pramalocha. She said to him- 'O great sage! I have a daughter 
named Malini. The name of my husband is Pushkar. I want to get her 
betrothed to you. Please accept her as your wife. In course of time, she would 
give birth to Manu. 
Ruchi accepted her proposal. Ruchi married Malini in the presence of sages. In 
course of time, Malini gave birth to a son who was named Rauchya. Rauchya 
Manavantar was named after him. 
Markandeya says- 'During ancient times, the ancestors of Ruchi were not 
pleased by his unmarried status. He was a sage of high degree and used to 
have food once a day. The ancestors asked him- 'O son! Why didn't you get 
married? Grihastha ashrama holds a very important place in the life of a man. 

608 
 



It is only after paying his three debts (rina) that a man is entitled to become a 
householder. All your efforts in paying off your debts towards the deities and 
ancestors are useless unless you are married. Your aspirations of attaining the 
supreme abode would go in vain unless you have become a father.' Ruchi 
replied- 'Getting married is the root cause of all sorrows. It also obstructs the 
upward spiritual movement of a man. That is why I am not having any interest 
in getting married. 
Having self control helps a man to attain salvation.' The ancestors said- 'The 
path you have chosen would never lead you towards salvation. A man reaps 
the fruits of his Karmas committed in his previous lives in the form of 
happiness and sorrow. An intelligent man must act in such a manner that his 
soul remains aloof from his Karmas.' Ruchi replied- 'The path of actions 
(Karma) has been described as an Avidya in the Vedas. Why are you pushing 
me towards that path?' The ancestors replied- 'It is true what you have said. 
But at the same time, it can be proved wrong by one's Karmas because 
Karmas are the means by which a man attains self-knowledge. Your belief that 
your actions are purifying your soul is based on false notions. Actually, by not 
doing your Karma, you are only torturing your soul. 
Karma is very beneficial for a man's upliftment. So, you must get married to 
enjoy a blissful life.' Ruchi replied- 'O great ancestors! Who will give his 
daughter to a poor and an old man like me?' The ancestors warned Ruchi that 
if he went against their wishes, he would face degradation in every sphere of 
his life. After saying this, the ancestors disappeared. 
RUCHI EULOGISES HIS ANCESTORS WHO BLESS HIMMarkandeya says- 'After 
the departure of his ancestors, Ruchi started wandering here and there in his 
restlessness. After sometime, when he regained his composure, he decided to 
do penance to please Lord Brahma. His penance continued for one hundred 
years. After the accomplishment of his penance, Lord Brahma appeared 
before him and asked what he desired. Ruchi expressed his desire of getting 
married as per the aspirations of his ancestors. Lord Brahma blessed him and 
also instructed Ruchi to eulogise his ancestors so that his wishes could be 

609 
 



fulfilled.' Ruchi eulogised his ancestors by chanting Stotras- 'I make salutations 
to my ancestors who preside over the ceremony of Shradha, who are pacified 
even by the deities, by the chanting of Swaha, made during the ceremony of 
Shradha. I make salutations to my ancestors who dwell in the space and in the 
heaven. May my ancestors accept the offerings, which I am making in the 
form of flowers, cereals, water, Dhup etc.' Markandeya says- 'Hardly had 
Ruchi accomplished his eulogy of the ancestors, a very bright effulgence 
appeared in front of him, who were in fact his ancestors. They said- 'Demand 
any boon.' Ruchi replied- 'Lord Brahma has instructed me to enhance the 
process of creation. So I need a wife for that purpose. The ancestors said- 
'Here at this very place, you will find a very beautiful wife. She would give 
birth to Rauchya. You too would become very famous as Prajapati because of 
your numerous sons and you will attain salvation in the end.' After blessing 
Ruchi, the ancestors departed for heaven. 
THE BEGINNING OF BHAUTYA MANVANTAR Markandeya says- 'Now I am 
going to tell you about the origin of Bhautya Manavantar. Sage Angira had a 
disciple named Bhuti. He was short tempered in nature and used to curse 
anybody at the earliest opportunity. Everybody including the deities like Indra, 
Vayu, Surya etc. were scared of him. Nobody went against his wishes and 
followed his commands.' Bhuti had no children and commenced a rigorous 
penance to achieve one. But still, his aspiration remained unfulfilled. He 
decided to quit doing penance. His brother named Suvarcha invited him to the 
Yagya he was performing. Bhuti left the hermitage after entrusting his 
disciple- Shanti to look after its affairs. 
Shanti tried his best to perform his duties according to the instructions of his 
teacher- Bhuti. Yet, one day, the sacrificial fire got extinguished somehow. 
Shanti became scared at the prospect of facing his preceptor's wrath. He was 
certain of being cursed by Bhuti. Finding no other option, he went to Agni 
named Jativeda and sought his help. He tried to please him by chanting Agni 
Stotra. He eulogised Agni in many ways. He said- 'O Agni! The first of all 

610 
 



creations, I need your blessings. Without you, the Yagya cannot be performed. 
All the Vedas are full of praise for you. 
The deities as well as the demons try to pacify you by making offerings to you.' 
The deity Agni became extremely pleased by Shanti's eulogy and appeared 
before him. He asked Shanti to express his desire. Shanti requested Agni to re-
ignite the sacrificial fire, which had gone off, so that he does not have to face 
the wrath of his Guru. He then requested Agni to bless his Guru with a son 
having all the good qualities. Agni was very much pleased by Shanti's devotion 
towards his Guru. He said- 'Your Guru Bhuti would have a son named Bhautya 
after whom the Manavantar would be named.' After blessing him, Agni 
disappeared. 
Shanti returned to his hermitage and was very pleased to see the sacrificial 
fire burning. In the meantime, his Guru Bhuti arrived. His Guru was very 
pleased with the sincerity of Shanti with which he performed his duties in his 
absence. Bhuti said- 'O son! I don't understand the reason why my heart is 
overwhelmed with love. Love is alien to my nature. If you are cognisant of the 
reason, please tell me.' Then Shanti narrated the whole story. Bhuti was very 
pleased by his devotion. He taught all the Vedas to Shanti. 
In course of time, Bhautya was born to him. He was the Manu of the Bhautya 
Manavantar. 
During this Manavantar, there would be five prominent groups of deities- 
Chakshush, Kanishth, Pavitra, Bhrajir and Dharavrit. During this Manavantar, 
Indra would be known as Shuchi. The names of the SaptaRishis would be 
Agnigh, Agnibahu, Suchi, Mukt, Madhav, Shukra and Ajit. 
Bhautya Manu would have ten sons- Guh, Gambhir, Brahna, Bharata, 
Anugraha, Srimani, Prateer, Vishnu, Sankraman and Subal. A man who listens 
to the tales of all the fourteen Manvantaras is not only blessed but becomes 
liberated from all his sins. 
BIRTH OF MARTANDADEV Lord Brahma had created Daksha from the thumb 
of his right hand. Daksha's wife was created from the thumb of Brahma's left 

611 
 



hand. Daksha had a daughter named Aditi. Martandadev was the son of Aditi 
and his father was Kashyapa. 
Kraustuki asked- 'O lord! Why did Vivasvan Surya took birth as the son of 
Kashyapa.' Markandeya says- 'During the initial phase of creation, when 
nothing existed, except a large egg. 
Lord Brahma manifested inside that egg. Subsequently, he came out from that 
egg. At that time, a loud sound of OM came out from his mouth. From this 
sound of Omkar, were created Bhur, Bhuvah and in the end Swah. These three 
mystic words are the forms of Surya. After that, three more mystic words 
were created- Mahah, Jan and Tapah, each of the former word being grosser 
than the latter one. In the end, the word Satya was created, which was the 
grossest of all. These seven mystic words related with the Omkar illustrate the 
gross and the subtle forms of Vivasvan. 
MANIFESTATION OF THE SUN GOD ADITYA AND THE VEDAS Markandeya says- 
'After Brahma came out from that egg, Rigveda manifested from his first 
mouth. From the mouth facing south, manifested the Yajurveda. After that, 
Samaveda manifested from his mouth facing west. In the end, Atharvaveda 
came out from the mouth facing north. The Rigveda symbolises the Rajo Guna 
while the Yajurveda symbolises the Satva Guna. 
Samaveda comprises of Tamo Guna whereas Atharvaveda is the mixture of 
Satva and Tamo Guna. The manifestation of the Vedas had illuminated the 
whole atmosphere. But the manifestation of Omkar overlapped their radiance 
and covered all the Vedas. At last, the radiance of the Vedas got united with 
that of the Omkar. The Rigveda symbolises the form of Brahma during the 
period of creation while Yajurveda symbolises Lord Vishnu during the whole 
period of nurturing. Samaveda is symbolical of Rudra at the time of 
annihilation. 
Markandeya says- 'In the beginning of the creation, Surya shed unbearable 
amount of heat. This made the process of creation very difficult. Lord Brahma 
became worried. He thought- 'Due to the extreme heat of the Sun, all the 

612 
 



water on this earth is getting evaporated. If this continues to happen then 
how would the creatures survive?' Lord Brahma eulogised Surya to please 
him. He said- 'I make salutations to Surya who is the object of contemplation 
of great sages, who is the source of all energy. O Surya! It is only because of 
you that I can create, nurture and annihilate. You are the protector of this 
universe created from the Panchatatvas. Please subdue your radiance so that I 
can commence my creation.' Vivasvan Surya became very pleased by 
Brahma's eulogy and subdued his radiance. Thus, it became possible for Lord 
Brahma to begin his creation. He created the deities, demons, human beings, 
animals, vegetation etc. in the same way as he had done in earlier Kalpas. 
PROGENIES OF KASHYAPA AND ADITI'S EULOGY OF DIWAKAR Markandeya 
says- 'Lord Brahma, after having created the universe divided the earth into 
various islands. He also created the oceans and the mountains. Marichi, the 
son of Brahma was the father of Kashyapa. Kashyapa was married to the ten 
daughters of Daksha. He had numerous sons from them like the deities, the 
demons and many creatures like reptiles. Aditi was the mother of the deities, 
Diti of the demons, Danu of the Danavas (monsters). Vinata gave birth to 
Garuda and Arun. Ravasa was the mother of Yakshas and the Rakshasas, 
Kadru of the Nagas. Muni was the mother of Gandharvas. Krodha was the 
mother of Kulyava Ganas, Rishta of Apsaras. Ira was the mother of the 
elephants and Tamra was the mother of Shyeni. Ila gave birth to all the 
vegetation while Pradha gave birth to the insects. The earth was inhabited 
with the progenies of Aditi's sons. 
Lord Brahma had made the deities masters of all the three worlds. This 
decision of Brahma had made the Daityas, Danavas and Rakshasas very angry. 
They got united and started causing obstacles in the path of the deities. A 
great battle was fought between the deities and the demons in which the 
deities were defeated. Aditi, the mother of the deities became very sad. She 
did a rigorous penance to please the Sun God. She observed fasts and 
eulogised the Sun God for most of her time. At last, the Sun God appeared 
before her but she could not bear his radiance which was so powerful that she 

613 
 



could not even open her eyes. She requested him to subdue his power so that 
she could see him. 
ADITI GIVES BIRTH TO ADITYA Markandeya says- 'After being pleased by the 
eulogy of Aditi, the Sun shed its radiance and became sombre. Now, Aditi 
could see him. She said- 'O lord! Be pleased upon me. The Daityas and the 
Danavas have captured all the three worlds from my sons. I request you to 
take birth as my son and defeat the demons.' The Sun God agreed to take 
birth as her son. In course of time, Aditi became pregnant. She engaged 
herself in religious activities so that she could become a mother of a virtuous 
child.Seeing his pregnant wife observing fasts, Kashyapa became very angry. 
He said- 'It is not proper for a pregnant woman to observe fast as it may prove 
to be harmful to the foetus. Why are you trying to destroy it?' Aditi replied- 'I 
am not trying to destroy my foetus. After taking birth, our child will destroy 
our enemies.' In her anger, Aditi released her foetus. Kashyapa started 
chanting the mantras of Rigveda. In a very short time, her child came out from 
that foetus. A heavenly voice was heard which said- 'O sage! Since you have 
called this foetus, Marit, therefore your son would be famously known as 
Martand.' After the birth of Martand, the morale of the deities was boosted 
up. Indra challenged the demons. A tremendous battle ensued between both 
the sides. Martand glanced towards the demons as a result of which they 
were charred to death. The deities were pleased and eulogised Martand. At 
last, the deities regained their territories they had lost to the demons. 
Markandeya says- 'Vishwakarma had married his daughter Sangya to the Sun-
God. But being unable to face the unbearable radiance of the Sun, she went to 
do penance after instructing her shadow to perform the duties of an ideal wife 
on her behalf. Ultimately, she returned back to her husband only after 
Vishwakarma had subdued the radiance of the Sun God. Vishwakarma then 
eulogised the Sun God by saying- I make salutations to the Sun God whose 
existence is beneficial for the whole universe. I make salutations to one whose 
own origin remains a mystery and who enables our eyes to see. I make 
salutations to the Sun God who destroys darkness and who lightens up the 

614 
 



whole world.' RAJYAVARDHAN'S SUBJECTS EULOGISE SUN GOD FOR HIS LONG 
LIFE Kraustuki says- 'O lord! Enlighten us on the greatness of Bhaskar.' 
Markandeya replied- 'There was a king named Rajyavardhan. His subjects 
were very happy and satisfied under his rule. They were free from all the 
diseases. Rajyavardhan ruled for 7,000 long years. His wife was Manini. One 
day, while Manini was applying oil on his head, she saw a grey hair. She 
became very sad and started crying. A drop of tear fell on the king. He asked 
the queen as to why she was crying. The queen told him about the reason. 
The king laughingly said- 'I am fully satisfied by my rule of 7,000 years. The 
grey hair on my head is an indication that I must now abandon my worldly life 
and become a recluse. This would be more appropriate for me.' When his 
subjects came to know about his decision, they became sad. But nothing could 
make the king change his mind. He decided to become a recluse after 
appointing his son as his successor. The king called the astrologers for 
consultation. The astrologers advised the king to change his mind. But 
Rajyavardhan did not listen to them. 
At last, his subjects decided to eulogise the Sun God and demand a long life 
for their king. All of them started worshipping the Sun God. A Gandharva 
whose name was Sudama appeared before them and instructed them to go to 
a forest named Guha Vishal and continue their penance. All of them went to 
the forest as per the instruction of the Gandharva. There was a beautiful 
temple of Lord Bhaskar in the forest. They worshipped Surya and eulogised 
him. Their worship continued for three months after which the Sun God 
became pleased and appeared before them. Lord Bhaskar asked them to 
demand any boon. He said- 'O Brahmin! Demand anything you wish.' All of 
them said- 'O lord! If you are really pleased with us, then bless our King 
Rajyavardhan with a long life. Please bless him with an eternal youth and a life 
free from all the deities. We want our king to live for 10,000 years. The Sun 
God blessed them by saying- 'So be it'. 
After receiving the boons, all of them came to the king's palace and narrated 
the whole story. The queen was very pleased but the king was worried. The 

615 
 



queen was surprised at the king's sadness even after getting such good news. 
The king replied- 'What is the use of remaining alive for 10,000 years? You 
won't be alive then. Will I be able to enjoy my life in your absence? Will not 
the deaths of my sons, my grandsons and my near and dear ones make me 
sad? The boon of myself enjoying life for 10,000 years will actually prove to be 
a curse.' The queen sadly said- 'Whatever you have said is true. I could not 
understand this fact because of my ignorance. Now, you must do your duty, as 
the boon of the Sun God is not going to go in vain. The king decided to go to 
the Mountain Prabhriti and do penance. He wanted to receive a boon from 
Sun God, which enabled all his subjects and his relatives to remain alive as 
long as he lived. The queen also decided to move along with the king. Both of 
them did an austere penance. 
The Sun God appeared before them and blessed them. Thus, Rajyavardhan 
lived for 10,000 years along with his subjects. 
MARTANDADEV AND HIS DESCENDANTS Markandeya says- 'Martandadev had 
a son named Manu. The seventh Manavantar in which we are living is named 
after him. Manu had many sons among whom Narishyant, Nabhag, 
Prishadhna and Drisht were the rulers of different kingdoms. Manu had 
performed a special Yagya named Mitra-Varuna with the desire of having 
more sons. But after the Yagya, a daughter was born to him and who was 
named Ila. Manu then requested Mitra-Varuna to transform that girl into a 
boy, if he was really pleased with him. Both the deities blessed Manu and 
instantly that girl was transformed into a boy. He was named Sudryumna. One 
day, Sudryumna had gone to the forest for hunting. Incidentally, because of 
the wrath of Goddess Parvati, he again got transformed into a lady. At that 
time, he was married to Buddh and a son named Pururava was born to them. 
Later on, he regained his body of the male. This time, he became the father of 
Utkal, Vinay and Gaya. All these three sons were very just rulers. Pururava was 
made the king of Pratisthanpur. 
FAMOUS MYTHOLOGICAL TALES KING PRISHADHNA King Prishadhna was the 
son of Manu. One day, he had gone to the forest on a hunting spree. He killed 

616 
 



a cow by mistake. This cow belonged to an Agnihotri Brahmin who was 
performing a Yagya. The Brahmin became very furious and cursed Prishadhna 
to become a Shudra. King Prishadhna too became angry and he wanted to 
retaliate. He took some water in his hand and was just about to curse the 
Brahmin, just then the Brahmin's father Mauli arrived. He warned both of 
them against cursing each other. He said- 'Anger decreases the life span of a 
man. It also destroys the knowledge and makes a man, a destitute. An angry 
person can neither be virtuous nor he can accumulate wealth. Even if the king 
had killed the cow deliberately, he is worthy of being shown compassion. But 
if he has committed this sin out of his ignorance, then certainly, he is not fit to 
be cursed. Therefore, O son! Don't curse the king. The cow must have died 
because of her own past Karmas.' King Prishadhna made salutations to the 
Agnihotri Brahmin and said in a loud voice- 'Be pleased on me. I did not kill the 
cow deliberately. It only happened by mistake. The Brahmin replied- 'O king! I 
have never spoken a lie in my life. Even my curse which I have given to you 
will not go in vain.' Sage Mauli took his son to his hermitage. In course of time, 
Prishadhna became a Shudra due to the curse. 
PRINCE NABHAG Markandeya says- 'Nabhag was the son of King Dishta. One 
day, he saw a beautiful woman who was the daughter of a Vaishya. He was 
very enchanted by her beauty and wanted to marry her. 
He went to the Vaishya and expressed his desire. The Vaishya was terrified at 
the prospect of facing the wrath of the king. He said- 'You belong to a royal 
family whereas I am a poor man. 
There is no match between both of us. Why do you insist on marrying my 
daughter?' Nabhag was not amused at the Vaishya's reply. He threatened to 
give up his life if he was not married. The Vaishya went to the king and 
narrated the whole story. The king consulted his ministers and the Brahmins. 
The Brahmin said- 'Prince Nabhag should first marry a woman within his own 
caste, only then he can marry the Vaishya's daughter otherwise he would be 
committing a grave sin. 

617 
 



Nabhag was not satisfied by the Brahmins' decision. He decided to forcibly 
abduct the Vaishya's daughter. The Vaishya went to the king and sought his 
help. The king gave death punishment to Nabhag. Hearing of this punishment, 
Nabhag went into hiding. The royal army went in search of him and finally 
found him. Then a tough battle was fought and ultimately, Nabhag was 
victorious. The king himself came forward to fight with Nabhag. As the battle 
was going on, sage Narada appeared and requested the king to stop fighting. 
He said- 'O king! Please stop this battle. Being a Kshatriya, it is not proper for 
you to fight a battle with a Vaishya, which your son has become after 
abducting a Vaishya girl. He is not entitled to fight with you.' CURSE OF SAGE 
PRAMATI Markandeya says- 'The king stopped fighting at the request of 
Narada. Nabhag married the Vaishya girl. After the marriage, the king ordered 
Nabhag to follow a Vaishya's occupation. 
Nabhag got engaged in activities like animal husbandry and agriculture. With 
the passage of time, a son was born and who was named Bhalandan. When he 
grew up, his mother entrusted him the job of looking after the cows. 
Bhalandan knew nothing about the job he was entrusted with. He went to 
sage Neep and told his problem. Sage Neep understood everything and taught 
him the nuances of handling various weapons as a result of which, he became 
a master in this art. 
After this, Bhalandan went to Vasurat, the son of Pitravya and demanded his 
share in the kingdom of his great-grandfather. Vasurat refused to give 
anything by saying- 'Being the son of a Vaishya, you are not entitled to 
become a king.' Bhalandan became very angry and attacked Vasurat with a 
huge army. In this battle, Vasurat was defeated. Now, Bhalandan had control 
over the entire earth. He returned to his father, Nabhag in order to hand over 
the reign of the kingdom, he had won in the battle. But Nabhag refused to 
take anything by saying - 'I have been cursed by my father to become a 
Vaishya. I cannot go against his wishes by taking over the responsibility of a 
king as this would disturb the peace of my ancestors who are in heaven and 
even I would not attain liberation. The second thing is that you have won this 

618 
 



kingdom by your power and strength. It will not be proper for me to rule over 
this kingdom.' Suprabha, the wife of Nabhag was listening to their 
conversation. She could not stop laughing. 
She said- 'You are not a Vaishya, because I too belong to a Kshatriya family. 
During ancient times, a king named Sudev had a friend, Nala. One day both of 
them went to the forest to hunt. 
In the forest, Nala saw sage Pramati's wife and became enchanted by her 
immense beauty. He wanted to marry he and tried to forcibly abduct her. 
Being a chaste woman, Pramati's wife started shouting for help. Sage Pramati 
heard her screams and arrived at the site. He became enraged when he saw 
Nala trying to abduct his wife and King Sudev doing nothing to protect her. 
Pramati requested King Sudev to protect his wife from Nala. King Sudev lied to 
sage Pramati about his caste, to help his friend- Nala. He said- 'I cannot help 
you because I am a Vaishya. You must go to any Kshatriya to take help. Sage 
Pramati was exasperated. He fumed- 'You will certainly become a Vaishya as 
you have lied to me about your caste.' BHALANDAN AND VATSAPRI Nabhag 
told his wife- 'I would never accept the kingdom for the second time, which I 
had relinquished at the instruction of my father. He then instructed his son to 
rule over the kingdom he had won. Following his father's instructions, 
Bhalandan started ruling over his kingdom. Later on, he got married and begot 
a son named Vatsapri. Vatsapri was married to Saunanda when he attained 
youth-hood. Vatsapri married her after killing the demon Kujrimbha. There 
was a king named Vidurath. He had two sons whose names were Suniti and 
Sumati. One day, while Vidurath was having his usual walk, he saw a large pit. 
He became very curious. Just then, a sage arrived at the scene whose name 
was Suvrat. Pointing his finger towards the pit, the king asked Suvrat as to 
what it was. The sage said- 'A demon by the name of Kujrimbha lives inside 
this pit. 
He controls all the events, which occur on this earth and in heaven. He 
possesses a mace called Sunand and which was made by Vishwakarma. This 
large pit which you see is the result of the assault, he made with his mace. 

619 
 



This demon is very cruel and wicked. He torments the deities and destroys the 
oblation sites of the sages. There is one very peculiar characteristic related 
with his mace. The mace would become powerless if touched by a woman. 
But this is only a temporary change because it regains its power the next day. 
But this fact is unknown to the demon. After saying this, sage Suvrat went on 
his way. 
King Vidurath returned to his palace and consulted his ministers. His daughter, 
Mudavati was listening to their conversation. One day, the demon abducted 
Mudavati. The king sent both his sons accompanied by a huge army to bring 
her back but the demon defeated them. The king made a declaration that he 
will marry his daughter to anybody who brings back his daughter and sons 
from the clutches of the demon. 
Hearing his declaration, Vatsapri came to Vidurath and said- 'Give me your 
permission. I will bring back your daughter and your sons after releasing them 
from the clutches of the demon.' Vidurath gave the permission. Vatsapri 
entered into the nether land through that large pit. A tremendous battle 
ensued between him and the demon. This battle continued for three days. On 
the final day of the battle, the demon tried to take the help of his mace and 
went to grab hold of it. But sensing that the demon was going to pick up the 
mace, she immediately touched the mace as a result of which it became 
powerless. Being unaware of this happening, the demon attacked Vatsapri 
with that powerless mace. But he could not harm Vatsapri. Ultimately, 
Vatsapri was successful in killing the demon. 
Vatsapri released all three of them- Suniti, Sumati and Mudavati from the 
demon's captivity and brought them back to the king's palace. After the death 
of the demon, Sheshnag acquired the mace. Mudavati's name was later 
changed to Sunanda, after that mace. King Vidurath became very pleased and 
married Mudavati to Vatsapri. 
THE KINGDOMS OF PRANSHU, PRAJATI AND KHANITRA Markandeya says- 
'Sunanda gave birth to 12 sons. Their names were Pranshu, Praveer, Shoor, 
Suchakra, Vikrama, Krama, Bala, Balak, Chand, Prachand, Suvikrama and 

620 
 



Swarup. After growing up, Pranshu became the king. Pranshu had a son 
named Prajati. Prajati had five sons among whom Khanitra was one of them. 
Khanitra became a mighty king and was very famous for his religiousness and 
virtuosity. He distributed the kingdoms among his brothers. Shauri was made 
the king of the eastern region, Udavasu of the southern region, Muni of the 
western region while Maharathi was made the king of northern region. 
One day, a minister of Shauri, Vishwavedi instigated him against his brother 
Khanitra by saying- 'O king! You must try to capture your brother's kingdom as 
your kingdom is too small for your descendants to rule over. A time may come 
when your descendants would be forced to choose agriculture as their 
occupation because the continuous distribution of your kingdom among your 
progenies would leave almost nothing for them.' Shauri said- 'My brother is so 
kind to me. Why should I cheat him like that?' The minister said- 'The duty of 
the king is only to look after the kingdom's interest. The relation should not 
come in the way.' At last, the minister was successful in convincing him. After 
sometime, the wicked minister also influenced the rest of his brothers. 
Ultimately, King Khanitra was left all alone as all of his ministers and even his 
sons were misguided by Vishwavedi. Vishwavedi appointed four priests of 
Khanitra as the supervisor of Yagyas. One day, while the priests were 
performing Yagya, four ogresses appeared from the sacrificial fire and tried to 
attack King Khanitra. But they could not harm him because of his virtuous 
character. They then turned towards Vishwavedi and the priests and killed all 
of them. Thus, Vishwavedi bore the fruits of evil deeds. 
KING KHANITRA Markandeya says- 'People present at the oblation site were 
shocked to see the dead bodies of Vishwavedi and the four priests. When 
Khanitra got this news, he too was shocked. Khanitra went to Vashishta and 
asked him the reason about the deaths of his brother's minister and the four 
priests. Vashishta revealed the conspiracy hatched by Vishwavedi to kill him 
(Khanitra). Khanitra in a sad tone, said- 'Shame on me as I have been the 
cause of the death of the Brahmins. 

621 
 



Had I not taken birth as a human being, my brother's priests won't have died. I 
am the real culprit. What should I do now? Where should I go? The remorseful 
Khanitra decided to relinquish his kingdom and go to the forest to do penance 
so that, he could get liberated from the grave sins of causing death to the 
Brahmins. He went to the forest accompanied by his three queens after 
appointing his son Kshup as the king. He did a severe penance for 350 years. 
After that, he died because of his bad health. All the three queens died too 
and went to heaven along with him. 
KING VIVINSHA Markandeya says- 'King Kshup ruled justly in the same way as 
his father Khanitra did. Kshup's wife was Pramatha. They had a son who was 
handsome and mighty. He had defeated all the kings and annexed their 
kingdom. He was married to Nandini, the princess of Vidarbha. Nandini gave 
birth to a son who was named Vivinsha. Vivinsha was a very mighty king. 
During his reign, the earth had become very populated. The enemies of King 
Vivinsha were very afraid of him but his subjects were satisfied by his just rule. 
King Vivinsha had performed numerous Yagyas and after ruling for a long 
time, he attained martyrdom while fighting a battle. 
KING KHANINETRA Markandeya says- 'Khaninetra was the son of King 
Vivinsha. He was very brave and valiant. The Gandharvas had proclaimed that 
no one could match Khaninetra's benevolence, who had donated the whole 
earth after accomplishing 10,000 Yagyas. Khaninetra had given so much 
wealth as donations to the Brahmins that there was no need for them to take 
donations for the rest of their lives. 
Khaninetra was sonless. One day, he went to the forest to hunt an animal for 
sacrificial purpose needed during Pitra Yagya. The performance of this Yagya 
was supposed to bless him with a son. In the forest, he saw a deer that was 
cognisant of his desire. The deer requested him by saying- 'O king! You can get 
my flesh by killing me.' The king was very amazed. He asked the deer as to 
why it was willing to get sacrificed. The deer replied- 'O king! I don't have any 
offspring. For this reason, I consider my life as useless.' While the conversation 
was going on between the king and the deer, another deer came near them 

622 
 



and expressed his desire to get sacrificed by saying- 'O king! Please kill me and 
get the flesh because the flesh of this sonless deer would be of no help to 
you.' The king was astonished. He asked the second deer as to why he was 
willing to die. The second deer replied- 'O king! I have numerous sons and 
daughters and this worries me a lot. Whenever my children go out in search of 
food, I become very anxious till they have returned to me safely. This way, I 
pass the whole day and night in anxiety. 
The king was very confused. He said- 'I don't know who is superior between a 
sonless person and a person who doesn't have any son. Although I needed the 
flesh for the accomplishment of Pitra Yagya but now after meeting both of 
you, I have become confused. It is true that a man has to face all kinds of 
sorrows because of their children but yet, a sonless man is not complete and 
remains indebted. So, I have decided to get a son by doing a penance just like 
my predecessors did in the past.' KARANDHAM Markandeya says- 'King 
Khaninetra went at the bank of the river Gomti and started doing a severe 
penance to please Indra. After being pleased by his devotion and eulogy, Indra 
appeared before him. He said to Khaninetra- 'O king! I am very much pleased 
by your devotion. Demand anything you wish.' The king replied- 'O lord! If you 
are really pleased with me, then bless me with a religious and virtuous son 
because I am a sonless person.' Indra blessed him by saying- 'So be it' and 
then disappeared. 
Khaninetra returned to his palace. In course of time, a son was born to him. 
He named the child Balashva. When Balashva grew up, he became the king 
after the death of his father. He annexed many kingdoms after defeating his 
enemies and imposed taxes on them. After sometime, his enemies not only 
stopped paying him the taxes but also regrouped themselves and recaptured 
their lost territories. Balashva had become weak due to the constant battles. 
He had only the capital city in his possession and had lost the other territories. 
One day, his enemies surrounded his capital. Balashva became restless as he 
would be no match for his enemies. In a sorrowful mood, he heaved deeply 
covering his face by both his hands. The exhaled air resulted into the 

623 
 



manifestation of numerous valiant fighters, chariots, elephants and horses. 
Very soon, this huge army covered the whole area. This army battled under 
the leadership of Balashva. Ultimately, the enemies were defeated. Later on, 
King Balashva became famous as Karandham because of the huge army, which 
had manifested from between both the trembling hands of Balashva. 
KING AVIKSHEET BIRTH OF AVEEKSHIT AND ABDUCTION OF VAISHALINI 
Markandeya says- 'Shubhvrata- the daughter of Veeryachandra had decided 
to marry Karandham. A son was born to them who was named as Aveekshit. 
The astrologers had predicted a very bright future for him. Aveekshit learnt 
lessons in handling all kinds of weapons from the son of Kanva. In a very short 
time, he attained mastery in the art of weaponry. Vara, Gauri, Subhadra, 
Nibha, Lilavati, Manyavati and Kumridwati had chosen Aveekshit as their 
husband in a Swayamvara. Aveekshit had also forcibly married numerous 
other women. 
Once, a Swayamvara was conducted in the palace of the king of Vishal for his 
daughter- Sudati Vaishalini. Aveekshit was present in the Swayamvara. But 
Sudati due to her arrogant nature did not choose Aveekshit as her husband. 
Hence, he forcibly abducted her by defeating the other kings. The fact that a 
single man had defeated all of them had made the other kings ashamed of 
themselves. All of them decided to fight Aveekshit unitedly. They picked up 
their arms and marched towards Aveekshit with a huge army.AVEEKSHIT 
DEFEATED, LIBERATION AND DISENCHANTMENT Markandeya says- 'A 
ferocious battle ensued between Aveekshits army and the other kings. Both 
sides fought bravely and Aveekshit managed to kill many of the kings but was 
outnumbered and got severely wounded. Aveekshit was finally made captive. 
Aveekshit and Sudati Vaishalini were brought to the king of Vishal. The king 
instructed Sudati Vaishalini to choose any king as her husband but she refused 
this offer. The king then requested his astrologer to choose an auspicious day 
for her marriage. The astrologer said to the king- 'O king! The present time is 
not auspicious for marriage but don't worry, very soon, the princess would get 
married at the advent of the most auspicious moment.' When king Karandham 

624 
 



came to know about his son's defeat and captivity, he consulted his friends. 
All of them decided to attack the kingdom of Vishal and release Aveekshit 
from captivity. Karandham marched towards the kingdom of Vishal followed 
by a huge army. A tremendous battle was fought for three days. Karandham 
became victorious in this battle. At last, Aveekshit was rescued from his 
captivity. 
King Vishal decided to marry his daughter with Aveekshit but Aveekshit was 
disillusioned with life. He said to Vishal- 'I can never accept such a woman as 
my wife who has witnessed my defeat. I have decided to renounce life. So, it 
would be better if you marry your daughter with somebody else.' King Vishal 
asked his daughter to choose any other king as her husband as Aveekshit was 
not willing to marry her. 
But the princess wanted to marry Aveekshit and believed that he still 
remained an undefeated king because he had fought single-handedly with all 
the kings. He was defeated only because of unfair means adopted by his 
jealous rivals in the battle. 
'I shall accept only Aveekshit as my husband otherwise I shall remain 
unmarried', said the princess. King Karandham requested his son to marry the 
princess but Aveekshit turned down even his father's request. Seeing the 
futility of his advice, Karandham returned to his kingdom. 
Aveekshit too went along with him. 
Sudati Vaishalini went in the forest to do penance. She observed a fast for 
three months. She became very weak but still continued with her penance. 
The deities felt sorry at her condition. They sent an envoy to persuade her to 
discontinue with her penance. The envoy requested her to stop torturing 
herself. 'You would be a mother of a Chakravarti king who would be mighty 
and powerful', said the envoy. 
Sudati Vaishalini said- 'How can I become a mother without a husband? I have 
decided that nobody except Aveekshit will be my husband. But he has turned 
down my proposal. So, I have vowed to remain unmarried in this life.' The 

625 
 



envoy said- 'O great soul! I have been asked not to reveal much. You must 
take care of your health. Due to the virtues of your penance, you will certainly 
become a mother.' Sudati following her instructions and broke her fast. 
AVEEKSHIT PROMISES HIS FATHER TO GET MARRIED Markandeya says- ' 
Once, Veera- the wife of King Karandham and mother of Aveekshit had taken 
a vow to accomplish a very arduous penance. But this could only be 
accomplished with Karandham's and Aveekshits assistance. Karandham had 
assured her that he would provide all the wealth required for the 
accomplishment of that austerity while Aveekshit had assured her of physical 
help. 
Veera commenced her arduous austerity named 'Kimichhak Vrata'. This 
particular Vrata had a peculiar characteristic and that was- any demand made 
during the course of the Vrata, ought to be fulfilled at any cost failing which 
meant forfeiting all the virtues of this arduous austerity. 
King Karandham was consulting his minister about the means that would 
change Aveekshits decision regarding his marriage. The ministers said that as 
Karandham had become old, there was an urgent need for his successor. The 
question was that who would become king after Aveekshit as he had decided 
to remain unmarried. This thought was tormenting all of them. 
Suddenly, King Karandham heard the priest who was assisting queen Veera in 
the accomplishment of the Kimichhak Vrata, telling somebody- 'The queen is 
busy performing the Kimichhak Vrata. What is your demand? I promise, it will 
be fulfilled by the queen no matter how extraordinary it may be.' Aveekshit 
too arrived at the scene. He promised that their demands would be met 
without delay as it was obligatory for the success of Kimichhak Vrata, which 
his mother was performing. 
Seeing the time as opportune, King Karandham said before the people could 
say anything- 'O son! I have a demand. Promise me that you will fulfil it.' 
Aveekshit gave his word. The king said that he aspired for a grandson but this 
was impossible unless he (Aveekshit) got married. Initially, Aveekshit tried to 

626 
 



convince Karandham that it was an impossible task as he had vowed to remain 
a celibate but ultimately he had to change his mind to honor his words. 
AVEEKSHIT RESCUES VAISHALINI Markandeya says- ' 
Once, Aveekshit had gone for a hunt in the forest when suddenly, he heard a 
female voice shouting for help. He proceeded in the direction of the voice. 
After reaching there, he saw Danu's (a demon) son Dhridhakesha, holding a 
lady by her hair. The woman was crying- 'I am the wife of Aveekshit. This 
wicked demon is trying to abduct me.' Aveekshit was surprised as to how 
could the lady claim that she was his wife. He apprehended that it must be the 
illusionary tactics of the demon to trap him. But despite his apprehensions, he 
went near the wailing woman to release her from the clutches of that demon. 
He warned the demon of dire consequences if he did not release her. The 
demon left the woman and attacked Aveekshit. A tremendous duel was 
fought. In the end, Aveekshit severed the head of that demon. 
The deities were very pleased at Dhridhakesha's death. They praised 
Aveekshit for his bravery. 
They asked him to demand any boon. 
Aveekshit demanded a valiant son for himself as per the aspirations of his 
father- Karandham. 
The deities said- 'You would get your son from this very woman, you have 
rescued. The child would become a very mighty king after growing up.' Being 
unaware of the real identity of Vaishalini, he told the deities- 'I had vowed to 
remain a bachelor but changed my decision only due to the word I had given 
to my father. But I cannot marry this woman because by doing so, I would be 
breaching the trust of that woman who wanted to marry me and who had 
rejected everybody for my sake.' The deities then revealed to him that this 
lady was none other than Vaishalini whom he was talking about. 'She had 
done a severe penance to be your wife.' After saying this, the deities 
disappeared. 

627 
 



Vaishalini requested him to accept her as his wife. 'You have rescued me from 
this demon. I offer myself to you', said Vaishalini. 
AVEEKSHIT MARRIES VAISHALINI Markandeya says- 'After Vaishalini had 
finished her lines, Aveekshit told her that he was forced to abandon her in the 
past after getting defeated but once again, he had regained her after 
defeating the demon. Both of them decided to get married in the forest itself.' 
'Right then, a Gandharva, Tanaya arrived there accompanied by many Apsaras 
and revealed to Aveekshit that Vaishalini was his daughter in her previous 
birth. 'Because of the curse given to her by sage Agastya, she was born to the 
king of Vishal. Now you must accept her as your wife.' Aveekshit married 
Vaishalini under the supervision of Tumbaru, the priest of the Gandharvas. 
Both of them then accompanied the Gandharvas to the Gandharva loka. 
There, Vaishalini gave birth to a son. Knowing about the feats, the child would 
accomplish in future, the Gandharvas celebrated his birth ceremony with 
great fanfare. After the birth ceremony, while Tumbaru was eulogising the 
child, everybody heard a heavenly voice, which said- 'This child will become 
famous as Marut; he will become the ruler of all the Mahipals.' Everybody was 
extremely satisfied by this forecast. 
KING MARUTMARUT ASCENDS THE THRONE Markandeya says- 'After the birth 
of Marut, Aveekshit accompanied by Vaishalini returned to his father's palace. 
After making salutations to his father, he kept the new born baby in his lap 
and told him that he had kept his word. Karandham became very pleased 
after seeing his grandson.' 'In course of time, Marut grew up. He had 
mastered all the scriptures. He was also proficient in handling all kinds of 
weapons. There was nobody like him.' 'Karandham had become old. He 
decided to go to the forest after making Aveekshit the king but Aveekshit was 
not interested in becoming a king. He too wanted to go to the forest. He said- 
'The shame of the defeat still remains there. How can a person, who was not 
able to protect himself, protect his subjects.' Karandham tried his best to 
convince him to become his successor but Aveekshit was firm in his resolve 
Finding no other option, Marut was made the king. 

628 
 



Marut went to the forest and did penance for 1,000 years. His wife did the 
same and went to live in sage Bhargava's hermitage. 
A HERMIT ADVISES MARUT ON BEHALF OF VEERA Kraustuki asks Markandeya- 
'O lord! We want to know more about Marut.' Markandeya says- 'After 
becoming the king, Marut started ruling in a just manner. He performed many 
Yagyas under the supervision of numerous 'Yagyikas' and esteemed priests. 
Angira's sonSamvart and Brihaspati's brother were his chief priests under 
whose supervision, the Yagyas used to be performed. Samvart had brought 
the peak of Munjavan Mountain after uprooting it, for Marut. King Marut's 
palace and the sacred oblation site were constructed on this very mountain 
peak.' One day, a hermit said to Marut- 'Your grandmother Veera is very 
tormented by the nuisance, the serpents are creating around the sacred 
oblation site. She is very displeased by your negligence. The serpents have 
bitten seven sons of a sage and have also polluted the water of the sacred 
pond. The sages have started making offerings to the serpents to please them, 
instead of paying attention on the performance of the Yagyas. Although the 
sages are capable of destroying the serpents, yet they have decided against 
doing so as this is not their job. This is the job of a king. A king should be 
aware of each and every event taking place in his kingdom. You are not aware 
of the misdeeds of the serpents because you don't have any detective to keep 
you informed of such events. Being a king, it is your duty to protect your 
subjects by punishing the wrong doers. If you don't do this then you will 
become a sinner. O king! Your grandmother is very much concerned about 
your negligent attitude and wants you to act in a way befitting a king.' THE 
SERPENTS TAKE THE REFUGE OF BHAMINI (VAISHALINI)Markandeya says- 
'Marut was ashamed after hearing the sage's words. He cursed himself for his 
negligence. He picked up his bow and arrows in anger and went to the 
oblation site. When he reached there, he saw the dead bodies of seven 
hermits lying on the ground. Being enraged, he picked up his most devastating 
weapon named Samvartak. The serpents became terrified as the tremendous 
amount of heat generated by this weapon had started to burn them. Unable 
to bear the tremendous heat caused by the weapon, the serpents took the 

629 
 



refuge of Bhamini (Vaishalini)- the mother of Marut.' 'Sometime in the past, 
Vaishalini had promised to protect the serpents when in danger. Vaishalini 
requested her husband- Aveekshit to persuade Marut against killing the 
serpents. Aveekshit told her that the intensity of Marut's anger was a result of 
the grave sins committed by the serpents. 
'But for your sake, I will request him to pardon the serpents- If he still does 
not agree to stop killing the serpents then I will have no option but to destroy 
his weapon- Samvartak.' After saying this, Aveekshit picked up his bow and 
arrows and went to the oblation site accompanied by his wife. 
THE HERMITS SONS BECOME ALIVE Markandeya says- 'When Aveekshit 
reached the oblation site, he found that the whole atmosphere was ablaze by 
the tremendous heat generated by Marut's weapon, Samvartak. He requested 
Marut to drop his weapon but Marut refused by saying- 'O father! These 
serpents are the culprits. They have killed the hermits sons. They have also 
polluted the reservoir and caused obstacles in the accomplishment of 
oblation-rituals. I am never going to forgive them. 
Aveekshit told Marut that the serpents had taken his refuge and hence he 
should forgive them to protect the honor of his father's promise. When Marut 
did not listen, Aveekshit picked up his weapon 'Kal' to kill him. Marut enquired 
from him as to why he was trying to kill his own son, who was just performing 
his duty of protecting the oblation site from the serpents. Aveekshit replied 
that he too was duty bound to protect the serpents that had taken his refuge. 
When the sages saw both father and son were bent on killing each other, they 
intervened and advised them against killing each other. Right then, a sage 
came with the news that the serpents had agreed to make all the dead sons of 
the hermit, alive. Thus, all the dead sons of the hermits became alive and once 
again, the father and son were prevented from killing each other. From then 
onwards, Marut took proper care while ruling his kingdom. Later on, he 
married Sukeshathe daughter of Kekaya, Saindhavi- the daughter of Sindhuraj, 
Vayushmati- the daughter of Chediraj etc. He had eighteen sons from his 
wives among whom, Narishyant was the eldest. 

630 
 



KING NARISHYANT Markandeya says- 'Among the eighteen sons of Marut, 
Narishyant was the eldest. Marut ruled over his kingdom for 70,015 years 
after which Narishyant succeeded him as the king. Marut went to the forest to 
do penance. After becoming the king, Narishyant decided to perform a grand 
Yagya, the like of which had never been accomplished by his ancestors. 
Narishyant made such huge donations to the Brahmins that it was more than 
enough for their future generations to come. 
Once, Narishyant decided to organise another Yagya grander than the earlier 
one. But no priest was found to supervise it. At his repeated requests, some 
Brahmins agreed to supervise the Yagya. But this particular Yagya was unique 
of its kind because the Brahmins played the part of host as well as that of 
priests. The Brahmins made donations to the Brahmins who were acting as 
priests. In this grand Yagya, crores of Yagyas were performed in all the 
directions of the earth at one time. This grand Yagya was possible only 
because of the wealth donated to the Brahmins by King Narishyant. 
Narishyant was such a religious and virtuous king. 
Narishyant felt joyous that due to his donations, the Brahmins had become 
wealthy and at the same time, he was also sad that his desire of performing a 
grand Yagya was not going to be accomplished as the Brahmins no longer 
needed donations. 
SUMANA CHOOSES DAMA AS HER HUSBAND Markandeya says- Dama was the 
son of Narishyant. His mother was Indrasena- the daughter of Babhru. He 
became the master in archery under the tutelage of Vrishparva. He also learnt 
the nuances of handling other kinds of weapons under the guidance of 
Dundubhi. He learnt the scriptures from sage Shakti and the art of yoga from 
Ashartishen. 
Sumana, the daughter of King Charusharma had chosen Dama as her husband 
in a Swayamvara. 
But Mahanand, Vayushman and Mahadhanu did not like her decision, as they 
too wanted to marry her. All three of them decided to abduct her by force and 

631 
 



marry who ever among them she decided to marry with. Their evil intentions 
were corroborated by the friends of Dama. Thus, all three of them abducted 
Sumana. Dama became angry. He asked all the kings who were present in the 
Swayamvara- 'Tell me whether Swayamvara is religious or irreligious?' One of 
the kings said that certainly a Swayamvara is religious and only Dama has the 
right to marry Sumana as she had herself chosen him. But some other kings 
supported Dama's opponents. They said- 'Rakshas Vivaha is the norm 
prevalent among people possessing arms. 
Only such a person has a right to marry Sumana who has defeated his rivals.' 
Dama became furious with them. He knew that they were saying such things 
out of jealousy. But still he decided to accept their proposal. He threw an 
open challenge by saying- 'Anybody who wants to die may abduct my wife in 
front of my eyes.' A tremendous battle was fought between Dama and his 
opponents. 
At first, Mahanand came forward to fight him with a sword in his hand. Dama 
showered a volley of arrows at him. All the arrows were neutralised by 
Mahanand. After that, Mahanand jumped and climbed on the chariot of 
Dama. Dama severed his head. After the killing of Mahanand, Vayushman 
came forward to fight Dama but his sword was broken into two pieces by the 
assault of Dama. Dama then killed his charioteer. After that, Vayushman 
picked up his spiked mace but Dama destroyed even this mace. In the battle, 
Vayushman got injured and fell on the ground. 
Vayushman quit the idea of fighting. Seeing him reluctant to fight, Dama 
spared his life. 
At last, Charusharma married his daughter Sumana with Dama. After staying 
for some days at his father-in-law's place, Dama returned home accompanied 
by his wife Sumana. 
KILLING OF NARISHYANT Markandeya says- 'When the newly married couple 
Dama and Sumana returned to the capital, King Narishyant was extremely 
pleased. King Narishyant after knowing about the brave deeds of his son was 

632 
 



very proud of him. As he had become old, he appointed Dama as his successor 
and he went in the forest to do penance accompanied by his wife- Indrasena. 
Once, Vayushman came in the same forest where King Narishyant was doing 
his penance. After seeing Narishyant and his wife, he enquired as to, who they 
were. But King Narishyant did not give any reply as he was observing a Mauna 
Vrata. Somehow, Vayushman came to know about his identity that he was 
none other than the father of his bitter enemy- Dama. He felt that this was 
the most opportune moment for him to take his revenge and killed 
Narishyant. Indrasena on seeing her dead husband, started to wail. All the 
sages and hermits who were doing penance in that forest arrived there and 
started cursing Vayushman for the grave sin he had committed. 
Indrasena requested one of the sages to go and inform Dama about his 
father's death. She said- 'Go and tell him that his father Narishyant has been 
killed by Vayushman while he was doing penance. Now, it was his duty to 
avenge his father's death.' After saying this, Indrasena committed Sati by 
jumping into the burning pyre of her husband. 
KING DAMA KILLS VAYUSHMAN Markandeya says- 'When Dama came to know 
about his father's death, he became extremely furious. Although he was very 
patient by nature but still the news of his father's death made him restless. He 
thought- 'Shame on me. Inspite of myself being alive, the wicked Vayushman 
had killed my father. I have failed in my duty. Being a king, it is my duty to 
punish the wicked people and protect the virtuous ones. But my enemy is still 
alive after committing a heinous crime. Now, I will perform my father's Tarpan 
only with the blood of Vayushman. If I fail in doing this, then I would give up 
my life by jumping into the fire. I will not only kill Vayushman but also his 
whole family. Whoever tries to help him will be put to death. Even if the 
deities, Yama or Kubera try to help him, they will get destroyed.' Markandeya 
says- 'After taking a vow to kill Vayushman, Dama consulted his priests and 
ministers on his future course of action. All of them unanimously decided that 
Vayushman must be punished for his crime. At last, Dama marched along with 
a huge army towards Vayushman's kingdom. 

633 
 



When Vayushman came to know of Dama's arrival, he became very angry. The 
battle commenced. The chief commander of Vayushman's army attacked 
Dama but was killed by Dama. Seeing his chief commander dead, Vayushman 
tried to flee from the battlefield with his army. Seeing him flee, Dama 
challenged Vayushman. Vayushman accepted Dama's challenge and turned 
back to fight again. A ferocious battle was fought. In a very short time, Dama 
killed all the seven sons of Vayushman, his brothers, relatives and his friends. 
Vayushman was extremely angry at the death of his near and dear ones and 
he attacked Dama with his sword. But Dama pulling Vayushman by his hair, 
felled him on the ground and put his feet on his neck saying- 'I am now going 
to pierce the heart of this wicked and mean man. All the deities, human 
beings, sages etc. should witness this scene.' Saying this, Dama killed 
Vayushman. Blood started to ooze out from the wound inflicted on 
Vayushman's heart. Dama tried to drink that blood but was desisted from 
doing so by the deities. Then Dama performed the last rites of his father with 
that blood. In this way, he took his revenge. 
THE BENEFITS OF READING MARKANDEYA PURANA The birds said- 'O Jaimini! 
This was the way, sage Markandeya had narrated the divine tales to Kraustuki. 
A person who either studies this Purana or listens to it achieves great 
accomplishment. All his desires are fulfilled and he enjoys a long life. He 
becomes free from all his sins. Markandeya Purana is the seventh among all 
the eighteen Puranas. Listening to it helps a man to atone for all the sins 
committed during the period of one hundred crore Kalpas. The virtues 
attained by listening to Markandeya Purana are equivalent to the virtues 
attained by making donations at Pushkar or by studying all the Vedas.' Jaimini 
replied- 'O birds! You have enlightened my mind by narrating the tales of 
Markandeya Purana and have made it free from all sorts of confusion. May 
the almighty God bless you, may you enjoy a long life free from all the 
diseases.' Saying like this, Jaimini went back to his hermitage. 
Home   
  

634 
 



7. VARAHA PURANA  
LORD VARAHA ENLIGHTENS PRITHVI PRITHVI'S QUERIES  
Lord Vishnu, in his incarnation of Varaha (a boar), had liberated Prithvi 
(Mother Earth) from the clutches of Hiranyaksha, the mighty demon who had 
abducted her to Rasatal. After being rescued, Prithvi heaved a sigh of relief 
and looked at her saviour, who was smiling. She curiously asked Lord Varaha- 
"How does the process of creation begin in the beginning of each Kalpa? What 
is dissolution? How do you nurture the whole creation? In what order do all 
the four yugas occur and how are they calculated? Why do you take 
incarnation in each yuga? All these things puzzle me a lot and I request you to 
enlighten me on all these subjects." Lord Vishnu burst into laughter and the 
whole universe, including the deities became visible to Prithvi through his 
opened mouth. Prithvi became so frightened by this amazing sight that she 
started to tremble in fear. Lord Vishnu then transformed his appearance and 
revealed his divine form to Prithvi so that she could become free from her 
fright. When Prithvi saw the divine form of Lord Vishnu, who was in his 
meditative sleep taking rest on Sheshnag, all her fear vanished. 
She was extremely pleased to see the divine appearance of Lord Vishnu and 
thanked her good fortune. Prithvi, filled with extreme devotion eulogized Lord 
Vishnu. 
Lord Vishnu was extremely pleased by her eulogy and said-"The answers to 
the questions you have asked are not easy to understand, but still I shall try to 
satisfy your curiosity. The supreme Almighty is eternal. In the beginning of 
creation, Ego (ahamkar) as well as the five basic elements- space, water, 
earth, air and fire manifest themselves from the supreme Almighty. 
Subsequently, the great element-mahattatva, nature and collective 
conciousness manifest themselves. The collective conciousness then combines 
with each of the three basic qualitiessatva (pure), rajas and tamas (dark) and 
exits in three different states. Its combination with the dark quality results 
into the manifestation of Mahadbrahm which is also called prakriti or nature 

635 
 



by the enlightened ones. Kshetragya (soul) is considered to be more superior 
than the Prakriti. 
This way the different permutations and combinations of all the three gunas 
with collective intelligence result into the creation of different 
"tanmatras"(subtle form of matters). From the tanmatras are created the 
"Indriyas" or sense organs. This is the way how the Universe comes into 
existence. I then create all the living creatures with the help of five basic 
elements.”  
“In the beginning there was nothing but empty space. Subsequently, various 
natural elements like shabda (sound), akash (ether), vayu (air), teja (light) and 
jal (water) came into being respectively - each of the latter manifesting from 
the former. Then, I created you (earth) to provide base to all the living 
creatures. The combination of earth and water resulted into an egg (anda). As 
the egg grew in size, I manifested myself as Narayan within it. During each 
kalpa a lotus manifests itself from my navel upon which is seated Lord 
Brahma. I then request Lord Brahma to commence creation. Inspite of all his 
efforts, Lord Brahma does not succeed in commencing his creation. As a result 
he becomes furious and from his fury manifests a divine child who starts to 
wail incessantly. The divine child is none other than Rudra who is requested 
by Lord Brahma to begin creation but the child being incapable of doing that 
decides to acquire power by doing penance and enters into deep water.”  
“Lord Brahma then created Prajapati from his great toe of his right foot and 
Prajapati's consort from the great toe of his left foot. The manifestation of 
Prajapati and his consort marks the beginning of copulative creation and thus 
Swayambhuva Manu is born. In the course of time the population increased. 
This is the way how creation takes place in each kalpa." Mother Earth 
requested Lord Varaha to shade some more light on the creational process as 
her curiosity had still not been totally satisfied. Lord Varaha replied- "At the 
end of the last kalpa, when the whole universe was engulfed in darkness, 
Narayan went into his yogic-sleep. After waking up he found the world devoid 
of any creature. Narayan, being the supreme Almighty- the creator, the 

636 
 



nurturer as well as the annihilator, decided to commence creation. The term 
Narayan means one who has his abode in the water- nar means water and 
ayan means abode. First of all five types of avidya (false knoledge) manifested 
from Narayan- tamas (darkness), moha (attachment), mahamoha (absolute 
attachment), tamisra (jealousy) and andhatamisra (anger). 
After the manifestation of these five avidyas, came into existence immovable 
things like mountains, trees etc. These being the primary creations came to be 
known as mukhya sarga (main creation). Continuing with his creations, Lord 
Brahma created species that were superior to the earlier creation-animals. 
This particular creation was called Tiryaksrota (quadruped). This way Brahma 
did his creation. Brahma's sixth creation was called Satvik sarga which 
consisted of the deities who were all virtuous by nature. The creation of 
human beings was seventh in order and was known as Arvaksrota sarga. Even 
human beings were of three types- those who were predominantly virtuous 
possessed satva guna had radiant personality and never experienced sorrow 
but those who possessed rajas and tamas gunas experienced sorrows.”  
“Brahma's eighth creation was called "Anugrah sarg" in which he created the 
sages and the hermits for the benediction of the world. The nineth creation of 
Lord Brahma was called Kaumar sarg (creation of adolescent beings). So, these 
are the nine main types of creation through which Brahma creates. First of all 
Rudra and other deities manifested themselves and then came into being 
eternal adlescents like Sanak, Sanandan, etc. Subsequently, all the ten 
manasputras of Brahma manifested themselves- Marichi, Angira, Atri, Pulah, 
Kratu, Pulasya, Pracheta, Bhrigu, Narada and Vashishtha.”  
“Lord Brahma's first creation-Rudra had manifested himself as Ardha 
narishwar (half male and half female). At the request of Brahma, Rudra 
dismembered his female part resulting into the creation of two distinct forms- 
one male and the other female. Later on, ten more Rudras manifested from 
the male form and all of them collectively came to be known as 'Eleven 
Rudras'." PRIYAVRATA ATTAINS TO HEAVENLY ABODE Describing the incident 
which enabled King Priyavrata to attain to heavenly abode Lord Varaha told 

637 
 



Prithvi- "Swayambhuva Manu lived during the first kalpa. He had two sons- 
Priyavrata and Uttanpad. 
Priyavrata was extremely virtuous by nature. In course of time, he 
relinquished his throne and after distributing his kingdom among his sons 
went to Badrikashrama to do penance.  
Once sage Narada paid a visit to his hermitage. Priyavrata received his 
esteemed guest with all the respect which made Narada extremely pleased. 
Priyavrata then requested Narada to narrate about some interesting incident 
which had occured in his life. 
Narada narrated about an interesting incident which had happened while he 
was on his way to meet Priyavrata- "I experienced an amazing incident 
yesterday while I was passing by a lake in Shwetdweepa. I saw a divinely 
beautiful woman who was standing alone at the bank of that lake. 
I was surprised to find such a beautiful woman at such a lonely place. For a 
moment I became so infatuated by her beauty that I lost all control over my 
senses. My lust had made me devoid of all my knowledge and learning. Now, I 
became very worried and ashamed of my conduct- but the damage had 
already been made. I immediately realized that she was not an ordinary 
woman. To my surprise, I saw a form of a divine person visible clearly within 
her body. Within nextfew moments two other male forms revealed 
themselves. Suddenly, all three of them disappeared leaving behind just that 
divine lady. I was dumbstruck by this amazing incident. I asked her as to who 
she was. The divine lady disclosed to me that she was none other than 
Goddess Savitri - the mother of all the Vedas and since I was unable to 
recognize her therefore all the knowledge had vanished from my memory. She 
also revealed to me that the three divine men which had manifested 
themselves within her body were in fact the three Vedas- Rigveda, Samveda 
and Yajurveda. After revealing these amazing facts to me Goddess Savitri 
assured me that by taking a bath in that lake I would not only regain my 
memory of the Vedas but also of all my previous births. I eulogized Goddess 
Savitri and thanked her for the blessings showered on me. I then bathed in 

638 
 



that lake and to my pleasant surprise I now remembered everything of my 
past births as had been prophesised by Goddess Savitri." Priyavrat was very 
surprised and requested Narada to describe some interesting incident related 
with his past birth. Narada narrated the following incident to him- "In Satya 
Yuga, I was born in a Brahmin family and was named Saraswat by my parents. 
I was very studious and grew up to become a renowned scholar. The almighty 
God had blessed me with immense riches and I never experienced scarcity of 
any kind in my life. But very soon I got bored of my monotonous and routined 
life. It had become clear to me that there was more to life than just worrying 
about the gains and losses. So, I decided to do penance to attain salvation. I 
distributed all my wealth among my sons and went to the bank of river 
Saraswati, where I first performed the rituals of shradha in the name of my 
ancestors and then performed yagyas. I also donated lot of wealth to poor 
people. Being satisfied, I then went to Pushkar tirth and did penance at the 
bank of river Saraswat by continuously chanting the sacred mantra "om namo 
narayan" and brahm par stotra. 
Ultimately, Lord Narayan became pleased and appeared before me. Lord Sri 
Hari asked me of my wish and I express my desire to get united with his divine 
form. But, Lord Narayan told me that the world needed me and so this desire 
of mine could not be fulfilled. He blessed me and gave me my name- Narada 
because I had 'donated' water (nar) to my ancestors during the course of 
performing shradha rituals. Although my wish of uniting with the divine form 
of Sri Hari had remain unfulfilled but still there was a consolation as I had 
been fortunate enough to see his divine form with my mortal eyes. 
Thereafter, I devoted my life to the worship of Sri Hari.After my death, I 
attained to Brahmaloka- I had been adequately rewarded for my devotion 
toward Lord Sri Hari. Later on, I manifested as one of the ten manasputras of 
Lord Brahma when he commenced his creation. It was only because of the 
blessings of Sri Harithat I came to be regarded as 'lok guru' by the masses. So 
Priyavrat, if you are desire of attaining salvation then you should follow my 
example and devote your life in the name of Lord Sri Hari." Prithvi, who was 
listening to the tales narrated by Lord Varaha with rapt attention asked him 

639 
 



whether it was possible for anybody to see Lord Narayan with his/her mortal 
eyes. Lord Varaha replied - "Lord Narayan has taken ten incarnations in 
various forms such as Matsya (fish), Kachchap (tortoise), Varaha (boar), 
Narsimha (half human and half lion), Vamana (dwarf), Parshurama, Rama, 
Krishna, Buddha and Kalki. The last incarnation, Kalki is yet to take place. 
A man can realize Lord Narayan by having total devotion in any one of the ten 
incarnations. 
Even the deities are incapable of this divine experience, what to say about 
humans. Lord Brahma is the manifestation of all the three qualities of Sri Hari 
and actually it is He (Sri Hari) who creates in the form of Lord Brahma. It is He 
who manifests himself in various natural forms like earth, water, fire, air and 
sky. It is He who manifests himself in various abstract qualities like 
consciousness. He is omnipresent and the whole universe is pervaded by 
him." Prithvi was anxious to know whether Narada's sermons had any effect 
on Priyavrat and asked Lord Varaha regarding this. Lord Varaha replied- 
Priyavrat was so impressed by Narada's discourses that he relinquished his 
throne and went to do penance after equally distributing his kingdom among 
his sons. Ultimately, he did manage to attain to the abode of Lord Sri Hari by 
the virtue of his total devotion. 
ASHVASHIRA'S UNIFICATION WITH LORD NARAYAN Prithvi asked Lord Varaha 
about the famous incident which described Ashvashira's unification with Lord 
Narayan. Lord Varaha then narrated the following tale- "During ancient times, 
there used to live a virtuous king named Ashvashira. He had performed an 
Ashwamedha Yagya in which he had donated large amount of wealth.  
Once, sage Kapila arrived at his palace acoompanied by sage Jaigishavya. King 
Ashvashira received both his distinguished guests with due honor. After the 
formalities were over, he asked both his guests about the means by which 
Lord Narayan could be pleased and also about the rituals pertaining to the 
worship of Lord Narayan." Both the sages being enlightened souls realized 
that Ashvashira was asking this question out of his ignorance. So they decided 
to enlighten him on the omnipresent nature of Narayan and said- 'What do 

640 
 



you mean by pleasing Narayan? Can't you see two Narayans standing in front 
of you?' But Ashvashira was unamused and unconvinced so he replied- 'I don't 
deny that both of you possess supernatural powers and also that all your sins 
have destroyed on account of the virtues attained by doing penance. But, I 
don't believe your claim to be Narayan.Lord Narayan is the almighty God and 
the supreme deity. He holds a conch, a chakra and a mace in his hands. He 
wears pitambar and has Garuda as his mount. His glory is indescribable and 
incomparable.' As Asvashira had raised valid points, sage Kapila transformed 
his appearance with the help of his divine powers. Similarly, sage Jaigishavya 
transformed his appearance and became Garuda. 
But Ashvashira still remained unconvinced and said- 'How can I accept you to 
be Narayan as there is no sign of lotus manifesting from your navel in which 
Lord Brahma has his abode.' Sage Kapila then slightly transformed his 
appearance and created an illusion whereby a lotus flower emanating from his 
navel became visible to Ashvashira. Sage Jaigishavya sat on that lotus flower in 
the guise of Lord Brahma. Not only that, they also created an illusion due to 
which all types of living creatures inside the palace premise. 
Now, Ashvashira was really confused and requested both the sages to break 
the magic spell. 
Both the sages decided not to test the limit of Ashvashira's patience and so, 
they trasformed their respective guises into their original appearances. Both 
of them said- 'Narayan is one but can manifest himself in countless forms. The 
whole universe is His creation and He is present in every single creature. It is 
impossible for a mortal being to bear the radiance of almighty Narayan and it 
is only when He appears in his more gentle form that the enlightened person 
is able to see him. Therefore, you should engage yourself in the service of 
mankind, considering each human being to be the medium through which 
Lord Narayan manifests himself. 
Ashvashira was satisfied by the explanation given by both the sages but there 
was still one question bothering him a lot so, he asked- 'Who is most likely to 

641 
 



attain salvation- a knowledgeable person or a person who indulges in rightful 
deeds?' Sage Kapila narrated the following tale- ' 
Once, sage Raimya and king Vasu had asked the same question to sage 
Brihaspati. At that time Brihaspati had replied that anybody who performed 
his duties with a sense of detachment is sure to attain salvation and to prove 
his point he had narrated the following tale- 'During ancient times, there lived 
a Brahmin named Sanyaman. He was the descendant of sage Atri. One day, 
while he was going to take his bath he met Nishthoor-a fowler, who used to 
catch birds and animals for his livings.' Sanyaman reprimanded Nishthoor for 
his evil deeds and said- Why do you trap innocent birds and animals? 
Nishthoor replied- 'The almighty God is present in each living creature. One 
who is desirous of attaining salvation must under no circumstances allow his 
ego to dominate him. The 'doer' is not the man but the supreme Almighty 
present in him. Keeping this fact in his mind a man should perform his duties 
with nonchallance and a sense of detachment. If I earn my livelyhood by 
catching birds and animals then it is the will of almighty.' To prove his point, 
the fowler spread his iron-net and kept dry blocks of wood underneath it and 
then requested Sanyaman to ignite those blocks. Sanyaman was surprised but 
burnt the wodden-logs as per the fowler's instruction. In a short time all the 
wodden-blocks became ablaze and the flames startes coming out from the 
thousand of small holes of the iron-net. The fowler then told Sanyaman that 
although the flames coming from each hole appeared to have distinct sources, 
yet the fact was that the flames manifested from the single source-wodden 
blocks that were burning beneath the iron-net. 
The fowler said- "It was impossible to extinguish the fire untill and unless the 
source of the fire was extinguished. Each hole of the iron-net can be 
compared with an individual and the almighty God with the source of fire. A 
man does what God wills and he can never experience sorrow provided he 
constantly remembers the Almighty even while he is performing his daily 
chores." Sanyaman was very much impressed by the fowler's wisdom. Having 
finished his tale, sage Brihaspati told Raimya- "Now it must be evident to you 

642 
 



that salvation is within the reach of any individual. It does not make much 
difference whether the seeker of salvation is a householder or a hermit 
aspiring for knowledge." Continuing with the story of Ashvashira, Lord Varaha 
told Prithvi- "King Ashvashira was so impressed by Kapila's preachings that he 
went to Naimisharanya and spent his rest of his life in the service of Lord 
Narayan.  
Once, while he was performing yagya, suddenly Lord Vishnu manifested 
himself from the altar in the form of a brilliant effulgence and the identity of 
Ashvashira merged with it. This way, Ashvashira got united with Lord Vishnu 
by the virtue of his deep devotion. 
KING VASU AND SAGE RAIMYA UNITE WITH SRI HARI Prithvi was anxious to 
know about the effect sage Brihaspati's discources had on King Vasu as well as 
sage Raimya. She asked Lord Varaha- "What did both king Vasu and sage 
Raimya do after listening to the preachings of sage Brihaspati?" Lord Varaha 
replied- "King Vasu was so impressed by Brihaspati's discources that he 
decided to spend the rest of his life in the service of Lord Narayan. He 
appointed Viwasman- his eldest son as his successor and left for Pushkar tirth. 
He engaged himself in austere penance by chanting pundarikaksha stotra. One 
day, while Vasu was chanting Pundarikaksha stotra, he experienced an 
amazing incident- an entity whose complexion was blue, manifested from his 
body and stood with folded hands. In his bewilderment, king Vasu requested 
the stranger to introduce himself. 
The entity narrated the following tale to him - "O King, you were the ruler of 
Janasthan in your second previous birth.  
Once, while you had gone deep into the forest on a hunting spree, you were 
delighted to find a deer which in fact was none other but myself. In fact, I had 
disguised myself as a deer and was wandering in the forest. 
Being oblivious of this fact you had killed that dear. Later on, when you 
realized your mistake, you cursed yourself for having killed an innocent 
Brahmin. To get absolved of this sin, you had observed a fast on Ekadashi and 

643 
 



had donated a cow to please Lord Narayan. But, in spite of all these austerities 
you did not attain liberation because at the time of your death you had 
chanted your wife's name whose name was Narayani instead of Narayan. This 
blunder of your's had stopped you from attaining to Vishnu loka for one 
complete kalpa. But, my revengeful soul continued to torture your soul till it 
was driven out by Lord Narayan's escorts. It was only then that you were able 
to attain to Vishnu loka.”  
“In your next birth you were born as the king of Kashmir. I did not spare you 
even in that birth and possessed your body. You performed numerous yagyas 
to get rid of me but all your efforts went in vain as you had not chanted the 
holy name of Lord Vishnu in any of the rituals that you had performed. But, 
now I was forced to abandon your body since you have been constantly 
chanting the sacrosanct pundarikaksha stotra. I have also become absolved of 
all my sin by the virtue of listening to the pundarikaksha stotra." King Vasu 
expressed his gratitude to the entity for shedding light on his previous births. 
Suddenly, a divine aircraft descended from the heaven and king Vasu left for 
Vishnuloka mounted on it. Meanwhile, sage Raimya got the news of Vasu's 
ascension to heaven to Vishnuloka, he wanted to emulate the feat of his 
friend. He reached Gaya and performed shradha in the name of his ancestors. 
He then engaged himself in an austere penance. Sanatkumar-one of the 
manasputras became very pleased by Raimya's penance and appeared before 
him. He complimented Raimya for liberating his ancestors by performing 
shradha at Gaya. He then described the virtues of performing shradha at Gaya 
and narrated the following tale - "There lived a king named Vishal who had no 
son. One day, he invited few Brahmins to his palace and asked them how he 
could beget a son. All the Brahmins revealed to him that he did not have son 
because of the curse of his ancestors. "You have not performed their shradha 
so, they are angry with you and you can never beget a son unless you 
performed shradha rituals at Gaya. Vishal went to Gaya as per the instruction 
of the Brahmins. He performed the shradha rituals and offered pinda-dan in 
the name of his ancestors. While he was still performing the rituals, he was 

644 
 



amazed to see three men descending from the sky- one of them was of fair 
complexion while the remaining two were of wheatish and dark complexion 
respectively. Vishal curiously asked them as to who they were. The fair-
complexioned person replied- 'I am your father- 'sit'. The person with 
wheatish complexion is my father and the third person amongst us is my 
grandfather. My father had committed grave sins while he was alive and 
killing a Brahmin was one the gravest sin he had committed. My grandfather 
was even worst than my father and his dark complexion is nothing as 
compared to his grave sins. He had killed numerous innocent sages for no 
fault of theirs. All three of us have come to express our gratitude as we have 
become liberated from our sins by the virtue of the shradha rituals you have 
performed. The water which you had offered to us while performing the 
rituals have given us the ability to communicate with you, even though we are 
spirits.' After finishing his tale, Sanatkumar told sage Raimya that Gaya was 
supreme among all the places of pilgrimage and the virtues of performing 
shradha over there is incomparable. Sage Raimya dedicated rest of his life to 
the worship of Lord Gadadhar. At last, Lord Gadadhar appeared before him. 
Sage Raimya requested the Lord to give him a place in his abode which was 
dwelled by sages like Sanak and Sanandan. Lord Gadadhar blessed him by 
saying- 'So be it.' This way, sage Raimya attained enlightenment with the 
blessings of the merciful Lord Gadadhar and ultimately attained to the divine 
abode of Lord Vishnu. 
MATSYA AVATAR  
Once, when Lord Vishnu awakened from his yoga nidra, he found that the 
Vedas had submerged in the ocean as the result of Pralaya (deluge). He 
incarnated as matsya (fish) to retrieve the Vedas from the ocean-bed. As soon 
as Lord Matsya entered into the ocean, He attained such an enormous size 
that the deities became frightened. 
All the deities then eulogized Lord Matsya and requested him to regain his 
original form- "O Narayan- the imperceivable lord. You manifest yourself in 

645 
 



each and every particle of this Universe. You are omnipresent and exist even 
during the time of deluge when nothing else exist. 
O Lord! We are scared of your present form." On seeing the deities frightened, 
Lord Matsya retrieved the Vedas from the sea-bed and transformed his 
appearance from the huge fish to that of Lord Vishnu. The deities were filled 
with joy to see the divine appearance of Lord Vishnu. 
KING DURJAY During Satya Yuga, there lived a king named Suprateek. 
Although he had two queens, yet none of them bore any son to him. One day, 
Suprateek went to meet sage Durvasa, who had his hermitage at the foothills 
of Chitrakut mountain and engaged himself in the sevice of Durvasa. 
The sage blessed the king and prophesised that he would become a proud 
father of a mighty son named Durjay. Durvasa's prophesy came true and 
Suprateek's eldest queen- Vidyutprabha gave birth to a son. The child was 
named Durjay. In course of time Durjay grew up to become a worthy 
successor of Suprateek. Suprateek decided to spend rest of his life in the 
service of God, so he went to Chitrakut mountain to do penance. 
Mean while, Durjay being an ambitious king expanded his kingdom by 
subjugating all the neighbouring states. He conquered numerous mighty 
kingdoms and vanquished almost all the prominent warrior castes like- 
gandharvas, kinnars, demons and even the deities. Indra- the Lord of the 
deities was defeated by Durjay and was forced to retreat towards east of 
Sumeru mountain along with the lokpals- various lords protecting different 
regions of the Universe. The whole world went into turmoil as the fallout of 
lokpal's power being snatched by Durjay. While Durjay was returning to his 
capital along with his victorious army, he met two asuras Vidyut and Suvidyut, 
who had diguised themselves as sages. Both the impersonators requested 
Durjay to make some alternative arrangements so that the world could 
function smoothly. In reality, both of them harboured wishes of having the 
powers of lokpal's so they offered their services in this regard. Durjay, being 
unaware of their real identity agreed to appoint them as lokpal's and then 
proceeded towards his capital. While he was passing by the Mandarachal 

646 
 



mountain, he saw two beautiful women. Durjay was surprised to find them at 
such a deserted place. As he stood their wondering about their identity, he 
saw two hermits approaching him. Both the hermits asked Durjay- "Who are 
you? What is the purpose of your arrival? Durjay introduced himself and told 
them that he was on his way to conquer the whole world. 
Now it was the turn of both the sages to introduce themselves- "We are the 
sons of Swayambhuva Manu- Hetu and Prachetu. We had successfully 
defeated the deities and driven them out from their abode- Sumeru 
mountain. All the deities went to seek the help of Lord Vishnu and were 
successful in getting his assurance. Lord Vishnu then attacked us and 
vanquished our army but he spared our lives. Then onwards we became 
ardent devotees of the merciful Lord Vishnu. 
Hetu, then pointing towards one of the women said- "She is my daughter 
Sukeshi. The other woman you see is my brother- Prachetu's daughter and her 
name is Mishrakeshi. Please accept both these beautiful as your wives."Durjay 
readily agreed to marry both of them as they were really very beautiful. He 
then returned to his capital. 
Everything was going quite smoothly for Durjay, when on one fateful day he 
met his downfall because of his extreme greed. The incident happened as 
follows-  
Once Durjay had gone into the forest on a hunting spree, where he met a sage 
named Gaurmukh. Gaurmukh had been blessed by Lord Vishnu with a divine 
diamond named Chintamani which was capable of fulfilling all desires. 
Gaurmukh gave a royal treatment to Durjay with the help of wish-fulfilling 
diamond. He created an illusionary palace and offered variety delicacies to 
him as well as his whole army. 
Durjay wanted to have Chintamani diamond at any cost and therefore sent his 
minister- Virochan to persuade Gaurmukh to part with that diamond. 
Gaurmukh became furious after coming to know about the evil intention of 
Durjay and told Virochan to ask Durjay to leave at once. But Gaurmukh knew 

647 
 



quite well that the greedy Durjay would not give up so easily and would 
definitely try to acquire Chintamani by force. So he requested Chintamani 
diamond to create a huge army. 
Meanwhile Durjay ordered his chief-commander, named Neel to bring 
Chintamani at any cost. 
Neel proceeded with a large number of soldiers. A fierce battle took place 
between both the armies in which Neel was killed and his army got 
vanquished. Finally Durjay himself came forward to fight but even he was 
defeated. In the meantime, Hetu and Prachetu got the news that their son-in-
law was in trouble. Both of them proceeded with a huge army to help their 
son-inlaw. 
But they were no match for the might of their adversary and both of them 
eventually dieed in the ensuing battle. Meanwhile sage Gaurmukh found 
Durjay standing at the entrance of his hermitage with a small number of 
surviving soldiers. He sought the help of Lord Vishnu, who appeared within no 
time. Gaurmukh requested him to punish Durjay for his evil intention. Lord 
Vishnu severed Durjay's head with his Sudarshan chakra. The place where 
Durjay was killed later on became famous as Naimisharanya. Sage Gaurmukh 
continued to live at Naimisharanya without any problem. 
SHRADHA RITUALS PITRAS AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SHRADHA  
Once sage Markandeya arrived at Naimisharanya to see sage Gaurmukh. Sage 
Gaurmukh was delighted to find such an enlightened soul at his hermitage. 
After the formalities were over, Gaurmukh requested him to shed light on the 
venerability of ancestors and the significance of shradha rituals. 
Sage Markandeya replied- "Lord Brahma, after having created the sapta Rishis 
instructed them to worship him (Lord Brahma) but they became so arrogant 
that they started to worship themselves. 
Lord Brahma felt insulted and so he cursed them of becoming bereft of all the 
knowledge. In course of time, the sapta Rishis had numerous sons. After the 
death of the sapta Rishis, all the sons performed shradha so that their souls 

648 
 



could rest in peace. The sapta Rishis were also famously known as 'Vaimanik' 
because they had manifested from the mind of Brahma." Sage Gaurmukh was 
listening to Markandeya's utterances with rapt attention. He asked about the 
most appropriate time for performing shradha and also about the number of 
'ganas' each of the pitras were supposed to have. Sage Markandeya replied- 
"Pitras living in the heaven are known as 'somap pitras' are believed to be the 
most privileged ones among all the pitras. They enjoy the most delicious 
beverage-somaras. Their lifespan extends for the full period of kalpa and they 
worship 'marutas'. Sage Marich belongs to this category of pitras." Pitras 
belonging to the category of 'vairaj' are revered even by the marutganas. 
Sanak comes under this categoty of pitras. Each of these pitras have seven 
ganas. Similarly pitras known as 'bhaswar' have their abode in the world called 
'santanak'. These pitras are revered even by the deities as all of them are 
'brahma vadis' (one who has realized Brahma). They remanifest themselves 
after every hundred yugas. People belonging to any caste can worship the 
revered 'pitras' with an appropriately modified rituals and obviously with the 
permission of the Brahmin. 
Some of the prominent pitras are 'Vasu', 'Kashyapa', 'Marichi', 'Sanak' etc. 
THE APPROPRIATE TIME FOR PERFORMING SHRADHA Describing the 
auspicious time for performing the rituals of shradha, Markandeya told 
Gurumukh- "A person desirous of performing the rituals of 'kamya shradha' 
can do so on any of the following days- a) at the commencement of uttarayan 
or Dakshainayan. b) at the time when vyatipat yoga takes place. c) at the time 
when vishu yoga occurs. d) during both solar and lunar eclipses. e) if troubled 
by the evil influences of a constellation or a planet. f) if troubled by 
nightmares. g) at the time when the Sun changes its position from one zodiac 
to another. The various nakshatras like Anuradha,Vishakha and Shwati are 
considered to be very auspicious for performing shradha- especially, if the day 
happens to be amavasya. Shradha performed on such a day pacifies the 
ancestor's soul for eight years. Similarly the combination of amavasya with 
either 'pushya nakshatra' or 'punarvasu nakshatra' is believed to pacify the 

649 
 



ancstor's soul for twelve years. Some other days which are considered to be 
very auspicious for performing shradha are- the third day of the bright half of 
the Hindu month Vaishakh, the nineth day of the bright half of the Hindu 
month Kartik, the thirteenth day of the dark half of the Hindu month 
Bhadrapad and amavasya falling in the Hindu month of Magh. A man desirous 
of performing shradha can do so on any of the above mentioned days. He 
should take bath in a holy river and offer 'tarpan' (libation) to his ancestors. 
SHRADHA KALPA Describing the types of Brahmin considered to be elligible to 
preside over the rituals of shradha, Markandeya told sage Gaurmukh- "The 
following types of Brahmin are can perform shradhatrinachiket, trimadhu, 
trisuparna and the Brahmins who are well versed in all the Vedas. The shradha 
rituals can be performed by any of the following relatives of the deceased, 
apart from his son-maternal nephew, grandson (daughter's son), father-in-
law, son-in-law, maternal uncle, etc. 
Similarly the following types of Brahmin should never be invited at the 
shradha at the shradha ceremony- a deceitful or a wicked Brahmin, a Brahmin 
who is a habitual backbiter or who is accused of theft, a Brahmin who has 
married a shudra woman and a Brahmin who earns his livelihood by working 
as a priest. 
HOW TO INVITE BRAHMINS TO SHRADHA CEREMONY Invitation should be 
given to the all the Brahmins one day in advance. If invited Brahmins arrive to 
attend the shradha ceremony they should be treated with due respect. The 
Brahmin who is supposed to perform the rituals should wash the feet of other 
Brahmins to show his respect towards them. He should then help them 
perform 'achaman' (rinsing of mouth). Finally the invited Brahmins should be 
fed after the rituals have been completed. As far as the number of invited 
Brahmins to the shradha ceremony of the ancestors is concerned, the 
scriptures have strictly put it to odd numbers-one, three, five, etc. Similarly 
the number of invited Brahmins for the shradha of the deities is concerned 
the number has been put to even number- two, four, etc. 

650 
 



But if the person finds it difficult to invite the above number of Brahmins then 
he can invite only one Brahmin for both the types of shradha. While 
performing the shradha of maternal grandfather it is mandatory to perform 
the shradha of Vaishyadeva simultaneously. In the shradha ceremony related 
with the deities the Brahmins should always have their food facing east. On 
the contrary, in the shradha ceremony of the ancestors the Brahmins should 
have their food facing north. 
TYPES OF SHRADHA AND MANTRA A person performing the shradha rituals 
should have his seat made of 'kusha' grass. After taking his seat, he should 
invoke the deities and make offerings of 'ardhya' to them. While offering 
'ardhya' to the deities water and barley are commonly used along with other 
articles like sandalwood, incense, etc. During the entire course of shradha 
rituals sacred thread should be worn in an inverse position- across the right 
shoulder and not across the left shoulder as it is normally worn. While 
performing the shradha of ancestors offerings of articles like sesame seeds, 
water and kusha grass are normally made. 
It is customary to scatter sesame seeds near the place where Brahmins are 
having food in the shradha ceremony. The performer of the shradha rituals 
should imagine that the food partaken by them are actually satiating the 
ancestors. The chanting of 'Rakshodhna mantra' is a must. 
THE RITUALS OF PINDA DAN AND BALIVAISHVA DEVA One important 
characteristic of the rituals connected with pinda dan is the offerings made to 
manes in the form of sesame seeds and water. Another important aspect is 
that 'pinda' is offered on the 'kusha' grass which are kept facing south- first in 
the name of one's dead father and then in the name of one's grandfather and 
other ancestors. 
The performance of Balivaishva deva rituals mark the end of shradha 
ceremony after which the person should sit down along with all the invited 
guests to have his food. Ancestors become satisfied if shradha is performed in 
their names and all the desires of such a man are fulfilled. 

651 
 



Three things have great importance in shradha rituals- black sesame seeds, 
the auspicious muhurta named 'Kutup' and grandson (daughter's son). 
Donating silver is considered to be extremely auspicious. A person performing 
the shradha rituals should not venture out of his house till the completion of 
the entire ceremony. 
THE MANIFESTATION OF VARIOUS DEITIES During Treta Yuga, there lived a 
king named Prajapal.  
Once while he was on his hunting spree, he entered into a dense forest. He 
was delighted to see a dear who started running for its life after hearing the 
noise. Prajapal let his horse loose in the direction of the running dear. Sage 
Mahatapa had his hermitage in that forest. While chasing that dear, Prajapal 
arrived at the hermitage of Mahatapa. Being curious, he entered the 
hermitage and saw sage Mahatapa. The sage treated his guest with all the 
respect and offered him fruits to eat. After the formalities were over, Prajapal 
requested Mahatapa to describe the appropriate way of contemplating on the 
various forms of Lord Narayan which gave salvation to a man. Sage Mahatapa 
replied- "The Vedas proclaim that all the deities owe their existence to Lord 
Vishnu- Agni, Ashwini Kumars, Gauri, Gajanan, Sheshnag, Kartikeya, Aditya 
Ganas, Durga, all the 64 matrikas, Kubera, Vayu, Yama, Rudra, Chandrama, 
Pitra Ganas, etc. have originated from Lord Sri Hari. All the deities, although 
appearing to to have distinct identity, are in fact inseparable from Lord 
Vishnu." AGNI"When Agni manifested himself from Brahma's anger, he 
requested him (Brahma) to assign an auspicious day to him for his worship. 
Lord Brahma said- 'Since you have manifested first of all the deities, therefore 
the first day (pratipada) will be reserved for your worship. One who performs 
havan on pratipada would be blessed." ASHWINI KUMARS King Prajapal 
requested Mahatapa to describe how both the Ashwini Kumars manifested 
themselves. Sage Mahatapa narrated the following tale- 'Marichi was Lord 
Brahma's son while Kashyapa was Marichi's son. All the twelve Adityas are the 
sons of sage Kashyapa. One of the Adityas- Martand, was marrird to 
Vishwakarma's daughter whose name was Sangya. Martand had two children 

652 
 



from her and their names were- Yama and Yami. Being unable to bear the 
extreme radiance of Martand, Sangya created her shadow identity and after 
instructing her to serve her husband (Martand) in best possible ways, she 
herself went to live at Uttarkuru. Later on, when Martand came to know 
about the reality, he went to Uttarkuru and found Sangya in the form of a 
mare. He then changed his own form and became a horse. Both of them 
stayed there for a long time. In course of time, Sangya gave birth to two sons 
who became famous as Ashwini Kumars.' Martand instructed both his sons to 
please Lord Brahma with their devotion. Both of them engaged themselves in 
austere penance. Finally Lord Brahma appeared and blessed both of them by 
saying- 'Your good-looks and knowledge of ayurveda will be unmatched in the 
world.' It was 'dwitiya' (second day) when Lord Brahma had blessed both the 
Ashwini Kumars. This is the reason why this particular day is the reason why 
this particular day is deeply attached with the worship of Ashwini Kumars.' 
GODDESS PARVATI King Prajapal asked Mahatapa about the reason why 
Goddess Gauri- the epithet of power, had to take incaranation. Sage 
Mahatapa replied - "Goddess Gauri manifested from Lord Narayan and was 
offered to Rudra as his consort by Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma then instructed 
Brahma to begin creation but Rudra being free from all kinds of worldly 
attachment refused to oblige Lord Brahma and engaged himself in austere 
penance. Goddess Gauri then merged her identity with Brahma, who later on 
created his seven 'manas-putras'. In course of time, Gauri was born as the 
daughter of Daksha Prajapati and hence came to be known as 'Dakshayani'. 
Once Daksha Prajapati organised a grand yagya in which all the seven 
manasputras were assigned specific responsibilities. Meanwhile Rudra came 
out from his meditation and was extremely furious to see the earth occupied 
by countless creatures. He thought- 'Brahma had requested me to create then 
who is responsible for all these creation? Who has dared to transgress my 
authority?' As Rudra stood wondering, suddenly he heard the sound of the 
mantras being chanted at the yagya performed by Daksha. Now, Rudra's fury 
crossed all limits resulting into the emergence of numerous spirits and ghosts 
from his ears. He then went to the oblationsite accompanied by the ghosts 

653 
 



and started destroying it. Lord Vishnu tried to protest as a result of which a 
fierce battle was fought between both of them. It was only on Lord Brahma's 
intervention that both of them stopped fighting. Lord Brahma said- 'From now 
onwards Rudra would become famous as 'Har' while Vishnu would be known 
as 'Hari'. He then directed the deities to eulogize Rudra and give his due share 
of the yagya being performed by Daksha Prajapati.' Rudra became pleased by 
deities's eulogy and blessed them. This way Daksha Prajapati was able to 
accomplish his yagya with the blessings of Rudra. In course of time, Rudra 
married Gauri- the daughter of Daksha Prajapati.  
Once, Gauri went to her father's place to attend a yagya ceremony against the 
wish of her husband. On seeing her, Daksha Prajapati started cursing Rudra. 
Gauri was so enraged by her father's attitude that she gave up her life by 
jumping into the sacrificial fire meant for the yagya. Later on, she took rebirth 
as Parvati- the daughter of Himalaya. Parvati did an austere penance to get 
Shiva as her husband. Ultimately her desire was fulfilled and she became the 
consort of Lord Shiva. 
The tithi of tritiya is very deeply attached with the worship of Goddess Parvati 
because all the important events of her life (birth, marriage, etc.) took place 
on this day. This is the reason why tritiya is attributed to the worship of 
Goddess Parvati. A woman who observes a fast on this day enjoys a blissful 
married life. One important ritual related with the austerity of tritiya is 
avoiding the usage of salt on this day. 
LORD GANAPATI King Prajapal then asked sage Mahatapa about the 
manifestation of Lord Ganapati and about the significance of chaturthi in 
terms of Ganapati's worship. Mahatapa narrated the following tale- " 
Once all the deities went to seek Shiva's help in sorting out a peculiar problem 
they were faced with- while they experienced all sorts of hurdles and 
problems in their work resulting into repeated failures in their work, the 
demons on the contrary accomplished all their work successfully without any 
problem. When Lord Shiva learnt about their problem, he burst into laughter. 
Hardly had he stopped laughing than a radiant adolescent manifested himself 

654 
 



from his opened mouth. The child was so divinely charming that Parvati, who 
was sitting beside Shiva looked at him without dropping her eyelids. When 
Shiva found her staring at the child he became jealous. Jealousy transformed 
into anger and Shiva cursed the child- 'From now onwards your face will 
resemble an elephant and your belly will become large as a pot. In the name 
of yagyopavit you would have nothing but a snake hanging across your 
shoulder.' The child was none other than Ganesh. Lord Shiva's anger did not 
subside even after having cursed Ganesh. He was still trembling in anger and 
was sweating profusely. Numerous Ganeshas manifested themselves from 
those sweat-drops and each of them had a head of an elephant as well as a 
large belly. Suddenly, Lord Brahma appeared and requested Lord Shiva by 
saying- 'You should make this divine child, who has manifested from your 
mouth, the Lord of all these Vinayakas. Thus Lord Shiva made Ganesh the Lord 
of all the Vinayakas and blessed him- You will be the first deity to get 
worshipped in any ritual.' Chaturthi has deep association with the worship of 
Lord Ganesh, as it was on this very day that he had manifested himself. Having 
prasad, prepared from sesame seeds and worshipping Lord Ganesh on this 
day is believed to bring great auspiciousness. A devotee who worships Lord 
Ganesh on chaturthi never experiences any kind of obstacle in his work. 
NAG DEVTA King Prajapal then requested Mahatapa to shed light on the origin 
of the serpents and the significance of 'panchami'. Sage Mahatapa replied- 
The serpents came from the lineage of Kadru-Kashyapa's wife. Sage Kashyapa 
had numerous progeny from Kadru-Vasuki, Anant, Kambal, Karkotak, Padma, 
Mahapadma, Shankh, Kulik, etc. When all these serpents started tormenting 
human-beings, Lord Brahma cursed them that they would be annihilated 
during swayambhuva manvantar due to the curse of their own mother. 
The serpents became terrified and promised to mend their ways. They then 
requested Lord Brahma to give them a place to live in. Lord Brahma instructed 
them to go to three different netherworlds- Sutal, Vital and Patal. He also 
warned them that during Vaivaswat manvantar Janmejay would perform a 
grand yagya with the objective of destroying the wicked serpents but the 

655 
 



virtuous among them would manage to survive. This particular incident had 
occured on panchami and hence it became the destroyer of all sins. A devotee 
who worships 'Nag' (serpent) on this day and offers milk will never be 
troubled by them. 
KARTIKEYA Describing Kartikeya's manifestation and how his worship got 
associated with the auspicious day of shashthi, sage Mahatapa told king 
Prajapal-  
Once a fierce battle was between the deities and demons in which the deities 
got defeated. The reason behind their defeat was the absence was the 
absence of an able commander who could lead them. The deities went to seek 
the help of Lord Brahma. Being unable to solve their problem, Lord Brahma 
took the deities to Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva invoked 'Shakti' present within his body and thus manifested Lord 
Kartikeya. He was named after the six 'Kritikas' who had nurtured him by 
feeding their breast milk. Lord Shiva then made Kartikeya the commander of 
the deities on the auspicious day of shashthi. Under his able leadership, the 
deities finally managed to defeat the demons. 
A devotee who worships Lord Kartikeya on shashthi enjoys prosperity and gets 
all his desire fulfilled. A childless couple must worship on this auspicious day 
to get blessed with a son. 
LORD ADITYA King Prajapal asked Mahatapa- "The thought of divine radiance 
taking the form of human radiance bewilders me. Please clear my doubts." 
Sage Mahatapa replied - "When the almighty God willed to manifest himself in 
other tangible forms, an effulgence emanated from his being resulting into 
the creation of 'Surya' (The Sun). 
The whole world became illumined with Surya's radiance and all the deities 
dwelling within the body of Almighty God expressed their gratitude. Initially, 
unbearable heat emanated from 'Surya', causing great uncomfort to the 
deities but later on Almighty God reduced it to bearable limit at the request of 

656 
 



the deities. Surya had manifested himself on the auspicious day of 'saptami' 
hence this particular day became deeply associated with the worship of Surya. 
ASHTA MATRIKAS Continuing with his narration, sage Mahatapa said - "During 
ancient times, there lived a mighty demon named 'Andhakasur'. Andhakasur 
had become arrogant because of a boon of immortality received from Lord 
Brahma. Being tormented by Andhakasur, all the deities went to seek Lord 
Brahma's help. Lord Brahma took the deities to Lord Shiva who agreed to kill 
the wicked demonAndhakasur. 
 The battle commenced and a fierce dual fight broke out between Lord Shiva 
and Andhakasur. 
Shiva attacked Andhakasur with his trident. Stream of blood oozed out from 
the wound, but to Shiva's utter amazement each drop of blood falling on the 
ground resulted in into the creation of numerous Andhakasuras. In a short 
time the battlefield was overcrowded with countless Andhakasuras. Now 
Shiva's anger crossed all limits and he thundered loudly. Flames emanated 
from the mouth of enraged Shiva resulting into the manifestation of Goddess 
'Yogishwari'. 
Similarly, seven more Goddesses manifested themselves from different 
deities- Vaishnavi from Lord Vishnu, Brahmi from Lord Brahma, Kaumari from 
Kartikeya, Mahendri from Indra, Yami from Yama, Varahai from Lord Varaha 
and Maheshwari from Lord Narayan. All these eight Goddesses came to be 
known as 'Matrikas' and Lord assigned them the auspicious day for their 
worship. A devotee who worships these eight matrikas on ashtami is blessed. 
The use of 'bael' (wood-apple) fruit on this day has great significance. 
GODDESS DURGA King Prajapal requested sage Mahatapa to narrate about 
the manifestation of Goddess Durga and the significance of her worship on 
navami. Sage Mahatapa replied- The mighty demon-Vetrasur had driven out 
deities from the heaven. All the deities went to Lord Brahma and sought his 
help. 

657 
 



As Lord Brahma was wondering about his further course of action, suddenly 
Goddess Durga appeared from nowhere. She held various weapons in each of 
her eight arms and was mounted on a ferocious lion. Lord Brahma was 
relieved as he was confident that Goddess Durga would certainly kill Vretasur. 
Finally Goddess Durga indeed killed the dreaded demon without much 
difficulty. Later on, all the deities requested her to make Himalaya mountain 
as her abode to which she agreed. This particular place, in course of time 
became famous as Nandadevi. One who worships Goddess Durga on the 
auspicious day of navami gets her blessings. 
DASH DISHAS Having finished the tale of Goddess Durga, sage Mahatapa 
revealed how all the six directions came into existence- "Six divine women 
manifested themselves from both the ears of Lord Brahma during the initial 
phase of creation. The name of these six divine women were Purva (east), 
Dakshaina (south), Paschima (west), Uttara (north), Urdhva (upwards) and 
Adhara (downwards). In course of time all of them got married to six different 
Lokpals. Lord Brahma assigned the auspicious day of dashami for their 
worship. One who worships all these six Goddesses on the auspicious day of 
dashami is blessed and one who observes fast on this day gets absolved of all 
his sins. 
KUBERA Continuing with the tales of the manifestation of various deities, sage 
Mahatapa said- "In the process of doing his creation, Lord Brahma bellowed as 
a result of which Kubera manifested himself. Lord Brahma assigned Kubera 
the lordship of all the wealth and prosperity. It was 'ekadashi' when Kubera 
had manifested himself, so this particular day has deep association with his 
worship. One who observes a fast on the auspicious day of ekadashi never 
lives in poverty." LORD VISHNU Describing how Lord Vishnu manifested, sage 
Mahatapa told Prajapal - "Narayan- the almighty God incarnated as Lord 
Vishnu to nurture all the living creatures inhabiting the world. Eventually Lord 
Vishnu entrusted the job of world's welfare to Goddess Yoganidra and himself 
went into his meditative sleep. While he was still in his meditative sleep, a 

658 
 



lotus flower emanated from his navel. Lord Brahma was seated on that lotus 
flower. 
The almighty God was delighted to see himself in the incarnation of Vishnu. 
He blessed Vishnu by saying- 'May you destroy all kind of ignorance with the 
help of your sword. Hold this chakra I am giving you, to sever the evil 
influences of 'kal-chakra' (wheel of time). May all the sins be destroyed by 
your mace. May the deity-Vayu adorn your hand in the form of a conch and 
vaijyanti mala in your neck. May the Sun and Moon adorn your person in the 
form of Srivatsa and kaustubh diamonds. May Garuda be your mount and 
Goddess Lakshmi your consort. May people desirous of salvation worship you 
on the auspicious day of dwadashi. One who worship you on this day will 
definitely attain to the heaven.' DHARMA Sage Mahatapa then told king 
Mahapal about the manifestation of Dharma and the significance of 
trayodashi- 'Dharma manifested himself from the right part of almighty God 
and appeared like a bullock. The almighty God instructed him to protect the 
mankind from all evils and sins. All the four feet of Dharma signified four 
various virtues- truth, purity, penance and charity. In Satya Yuga, Dharma was 
four footed- all the four virtues were prevalent during that era. In Treta Yuga, 
the feet of Dharma reduced to three. The subsequent eras of Dwapar Yuga 
and Kali Yuga saw the further decline in virtuosity in which Dharma had two 
feet and one foot respectively.' ' 
Once a fierce battle was fought between the deities and demons. The bone of 
contention was a woman for whom both the side made claims. Dharma 
intervened and solved the contentious issue to the satisfaction of both the 
warring sides. Lord Brahma was very impressed by the deftness with which 
Dharma had handled such a tough situation and blessed him by saying- I am 
assigning the auspicious day of tryodashi to you. One who observes a fast and 
worship you on this day will be liberated from all his sins.' LORD RUDRA Sage 
Mahatapa then went on to describe the incident that led to the manifestation 
of Lord Rudra and the significance of chaturdashi- 'In the beginning of 
creation, when Lord Brahma failed in his repeated attempts to create, he 

659 
 



became frustrated. Frustration turned into fury and from his fury manifested a 
divine entity who cried incessantly. Lord Brahma tried to stop him from crying 
and said- tvam ma rud (don't cry). This is how Lord Rudra got his name. Lord 
Brahma then requested Rudra to commence creation but since Rudra lacked 
the power needed for doing creation therefore he refused and went to do 
penance. Later on, Lord Brahma created his manasputras and other living 
creatures. Daksha Prajapati was one of these manasputras.  
Once he had organised a grand yagya in which all the deities and even the 
demons had been invited.' Meanwhile, Rudra's penance was disturbed by the 
constant chanting of the mantras at the yagya performed by Daksha Prajapati. 
Rudra was infuriated resulting into the emanation of flames from his mouth. 
Eventually these fire-balls got transformed into ferocious spirits and ghosts. 
Rudra then reached the place where the yagya was being performed and with 
the help of all the spirits and ghosts started destoying the oblation site. It was 
only after Lord Brahma's intervention that Rudra calmed down. All the deities 
then eulogized Rudra and sought his blessings. One who worships Lord Rudra 
on the auspicious day of chaturdashi becomes absolved of all his sins. 
TANMATRAS Describing the importance of amavasya, sage Mahatapa told 
Prajapal-  
Once, while Lord Brahma was just about to commence the process of 
creation, suddenly 'tanmatras' (subtle forms of matter) revealed themselves 
from his mind. All of them being extremely virtuous were eager to go up in the 
sky to do penance because Lord Brahma requested them to become the 
'pitras' (ancestors) of the human beings. All the tanmatras then requested 
Brahma to make arrangement for their sustenance. Lord Brahma blessed 
them by saying- 'I assign to you the auspicious day of amavasya. Anybody who 
performs the rituals of 'tarpan' (libation) on this day would become absolved 
of his sins. You would sustain yourselves on various things like water, sesame 
seeds, and kusha grass which are offered by human beings to their ancestors 
on this day.' CHANDRAMA Describing the importance of purnima sage 
Mahatapa said- "Daksha Prajapati had cursed Chandrama, his son-in-law for 

660 
 



maltreating his daughters. As the fallout of that curse Chandrama started 
waning day by day and eventually became invisible on amavasya. All the 
deities became worried and went to seek Lord Vishnu's help. Lord Vishnu 
advised them to get the ocean churned. While the ocean was being churned, 
Chandrama once again manifested himself from the ocean. Lord Brahma then 
assigned the auspicious day of purnima to him and blessed him. A devotee 
should observe a fast on purnima and worship Chandrama for the attainment 
of kowledge, prosperity aswell as salvation. 
AUSTERITIES ASSOCIATED WITH LORD VISHNU'S INCARNATIONS 
MATSYA-DWADASHI VRATA  
Matsya-dwadashi is celebrated on the twelfth day of Hindu month-
Margashirsh. On this auspicious day a devotee should worship Lord Matsya- 
the incarnation of Lord Vishnu with appropriate rituals and give charity to 
Brahmins. Prithvi was the first one to observe this particular austerity while 
she was being abducted to rasatala by a mighty demon named Hiranyaksha. A 
devotee who observes a fast on this day and worships Lord Matsya with 
appropriate rituals attains to Brahma loka and remains there for eternity. 
Such a person attain's a divine body when creation recommences after the 
period of deluge. An issueless woman is blessed with a virtuous son if she 
observes a fast on this day. Matsya-dwadashi is capable of absolving a man 
even of the gravest of his sin. 
KURMA-DWADASHI VRATA  
This particular austerity is dedicated to the worship of Lord Kurma- the 
incarnation of Lord Vishnu. It is celebrated on the twelfth day of the bright 
half of the Hindu month 'pausha'. The austerity which commences on the 
tenth day itself when a devotee is supposed to purify himself by taking a holy 
bath. On the following day he observes a fast and worships Lord Kurma with 
appropriate rituals. He breaks his fast on dwadashi which marks the 
conclusion of the austerity. 

661 
 



A devotee who observes a fast on this auspicious day becomes absolved of all 
his sins and attains salvation. 
VARAHA-DWADASHI VRATA  
Varaha dwadashi is celebrated on the twelfth day of the bright half of the 
Hindu month-magh. 
This was the day on which Prithvi had been rescued by Lord Varaha- the 
incarnation of Lord Vishnu. An idol of Lord Varaha is installed on a pot filled 
with water and worshipped with appropriate rituals amidst the continuous 
chanting of the mantra-'om Varahay namah'. Offerings of various articles are 
made while worshipping Lord Varaha -sandalwood, incense, naivedya, etc. 
After the accomplishment of the rituals Brahmins are fed and charity given to 
them. One who observes a fast on this day enjoys a good health and 
prosperity. Such a man becomes absolved of all his sins and attains to heaven 
after his death. 
NRISIMHA-DWADASHI VRATA 
This austerity is observed on the twelfth day of the bright half of the Hindu 
month-phalgun. A devotee should observe fast on this day and worship Lord 
Nrisimha with appropriate rituals. This particular austerity is capable of 
absolving a man from all his sins. 
VAMANA-DWADASHI VRATA 
 Vamana dwadashi is celebrated on the twelfth day of the bright half of the 
Hindu month- chaitra. 
A devotee should observe a fast and worship Lord Vamana by saying the 
following prayer- "O Lord! Vamana- the dwarfish incarnation of the almighty 
Vishnu, who took incarnation on the auspicious day of dwadashi in the month 
of chaitra- I seek your blessings." One who observes a fast on this day is 
blessed and protected from all kinds of danger. JAMDAGNYA-DWADASHI 
VRATA This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Parshurama who is 
also famous as Jamdagnya. 

662 
 



It is celebrated on the twelfth day of the bright half of the Hindu month-
vaishakh. Before commencing the rituals, a devotee should purify himself by 
taking a bath and then worship an idol of Lord Parshurama kept on a pot filled 
with water. While worshipping he should make offerings of various articles to 
the deity- flowers, sandalwood, ardhya, etc. It is mandatory to remain awake 
for the whole night. On the following day, he should donate the idol to a 
Brahmin. 
A devotee who observes a fast on this day gets all his wishes fulfilled and 
attains to Brahma loka. 
KALKI-DWADASHI VRATA  
A devotee should commence this austerity by observing a fast on the eleventh 
day of the bright half of the Hindu month-bhadrapad and break it on the 
following day-dwadashi. He should worship Lord Kalki with appropriate rituals. 
As per the norms of the rituals, the idol of Lord Kalki is placed on a pot which 
is filled with water. This idol is donated to a learned Brahmin on the following 
day-trayodashi. 
PADMANABH-DWADASHI VRATA  
This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Padmanabh- an epithet of 
Lord Vishnu and is observed on the twelfth day of the bright half of the Hindu 
month-ashwin. One important charecteristic of the ritual is that all the organs 
of Lord Padmanabh is worshipped. The idol is placed on a pot filled with water 
and while worshipping offerings of various articles are madeflowers, fruits, 
sandalwood, etc. On the following day the idol is donated to a Brahmin. One 
who observes a fast on this day enjoys a prosperous life and attains to the 
abode of Lord Padmanabh. 
DHARNI-VRATA This particular austerity is observed in the Hindu month of 
Kartik. The rituals commence by worshipping various organs of Lord Narayan 
amidst the chanting of different mantras which are as follows- 1. om sahastra 
shirse namah - head 2. om Purushay namah - arms 3. om vishwa rupine 
namah - throat 4. om Jnanastray namah - weapons 5. om Sri vatsaya namah - 

663 
 



chest 6. om jagad grasishnave namah - abdomen 7. om divya murtaye namah - 
waist 8. om sahastra paday namah - feet. 
Similarly, Sri Krishna dwadashi is celebrated in the Hindu month of Ashadh, 
shukla- paksha. A devotee should worship Lord Krishna on this day and 
observe a fast.  
BUDDHA-DWADASHI VRATA  
Lord Buddha is believed to be the incarnation of Lord Vishnu. The austerity 
begins on the eleventh day of the bright half of the Hindu month-Shravana. 
On this day Lord Vishnu is worshipped with appropriate rituals and by making 
offerings of various articles like flowers, fruits, incense, etc. The following 
mantras should be chanted while worshipping the various organs of Lord 
Vishnu - 1. om damodaray namah - feet 2. om hRishikeshay namah - waist 3. 
om sanatanay namah - abdomen 4. om Sri vatsadharine namah - chest 5. om 
chakrapanaye namah - arms 6. om haraye namah - throat 7. om manju keshay 
namah - head 8. om bhadray namah - top-knot (shikha). 
After the accomplishment of the rituals, the idol should be donated to a 
Brahmin. 
SUBH-VRATA  
This particular austerity on the first day of the Hindu month-margashirsh. It is 
related with the worship of Lord Vishnu and the rituals have some special 
characteristics- having one meal on the eleventh day of the month (ekadashi), 
donating barley to Brahmins, worshipping the idol of Goddess Prithvi on 
'ekadashi', etc. The austerity concludes on dwadashi. On ekadashi, Goddess 
Prithvi is also worshipped along with Lord Vishnu. Both the idols are installed 
side by side and covered with white clothes. After that some rice grains are 
scattered in front of both the idols. As per the norms of the rituals, a devotee 
is required to remain awake for the whole night. Next morning, he should 
invite twenty-four Brahmins and feed them. He should also donate a cow, 
apparels, ornaments, an umbrella, woodden sandle and similar articles to 
them. A devotee who observes a fast on this auspicious day enjoys prosperity. 

664 
 



DHANYA-VRATA  
This particular austerity is a form of 'nakta-vrata', which means observing fast 
for the whole day and breaking it in the night. The austerity commences on 
the first day of the bright half of the Hindu monthaghan and lasts for a year. 
Rituals include worshipping Agnideva- an embodiment of Lord Vishnu, 
chanting of certain mantras praising the glory of the deity and performing 
'havan'. There are specific instructions on the type of food a devotee should 
have during the course of this austerity- for four months (chaitra to ashadh) 
he should have delicacies like 'kheer' seasoned in pure ghee. From Shravana 
to kartik he should have food-items prepared from gram flour. This way, the 
austerity lasts for one year whereby a devotee observes fast on the first day of 
every month that follows. The austerity concludes by worshipping an idol of 
Lord Agni made of gold. The idol is adorned with a piece of red-cloth and 
redflowers are offered to the deity while worshipping. After the rituals are 
accomplished, the idol should be donated to a Brahmin. The observance of 
this particular austerity brings good fortune to a man and makes him 
prosperous. 
KANTI-VRATA 
This austerity is related with the worship of Sri Krishna and Balarama. It 
commences on the second day of the bright half of the Hindu month-kartik 
and lasts for a year whereby a devotee observes fast on the second day 
(bright half) of every month that follows. While worshipping Balarama, a 
devotee should chant- 'om baldevay namah' and while worshipping Sri Krishna 
he should chant- 'om keshavay namah'. Subsequently, 'ardhya' is offered to 
both the deities. A devotee should have food prepared from barley-flour in 
the night but those devotees who have resolved to observe this austerity for 
four months beginning from 'falgun' should live only on 'kheer'. Offerings of 
rice and sesame seeds are made in the sacrificial- fire during the months of 
'aghan' and 'kartik' respectively. The rituals conclude by worshipping the deity 
'Chandrama' at the end of the year. Finally all the three idols (Sri Krishna, 

665 
 



Balarama and Chandrama) should be donated to Brahmins. A devotee who 
observes this austerity is bestowed with a charming personality. 
SAUBHAGYA-VRATA  
This austerity commences on the third day of the bright half of the Hindu 
month-falgun and lasts for a year whereby a devotee observes fast on the 
third day (bright half) of every month that follows. According to the tradition a 
devotee can either worship 'Shiva-Parvati' or 'Sri HariLakshmi on this 
auspicious day. While worshipping, the devotee should chant the following 
mantras- om gambhiray namah, om saubhagyay namah, om devdevay namah, 
om trinetray namah, om vachaspataye namah, om rudray namah, etc. One 
important feature of the rituals is making offerings of honey and ghee to the 
sacrificial fire. During the course of the rituals, a devotee should have food 
prepared from pure cereals preferably wheat. After the rituals are 
accomplished at the end of the year, the idols should be donated to Brahmins. 
One who observes this austerity is blessed with good fortune in his successive 
seven births. 
AVIGHNA-VRATA  
As the name implies, this austerity clears all the obstacles faced by a man. It 
commences on the fourth day of the bright half of the Hindu month-falgun 
and lasts for four months whereby a devotee observes fast on the fourth day 
(bright half) of every month that follows. One important characteristic of this 
austerity is the importance and use of sesame seeds in its rituals. It is not only 
the chief constituent of the diet but it is also offered in the sacrificial fire and 
donated to the Brahmins as well. After observing this austerity for four 
months, a devotee should conclude it by worshipping Lord Ganesh in the fifth 
month and donating the Ganesh-idol to a Brahmin alongwith five pots filled 
with sesame seeds. While worshipping Lord Ganesh, he should chant the 
following mantras- om shooray namah, om dhiray namah, om gajananay 
namah, om lambodaray namah, om ekdanshtray namah, etc. A devotee thus 
becomes free from every obstacle and gets all his wishes. 

666 
 



SHANTI-VRATA  
This austerity commences on the fifth day of the bright half of the Hindu 
month-kartik and lasts for a year whereby a devotee observes fast on the fifth 
day (bright half) of the every month that follows. It is related with the worship 
of Lord Vishnu and Sheshnag. A devotee should abstain from hot and spicy 
food during the course of this austerity. Lord Vishnu's idol is purified by 
chanting mantras and by performing ablution with milk. Offerings of sesame 
seeds and milk are made in the sacrificial fire. After the accomplishment of the 
rituals at the year end, Brahmins are invited and fed. Finally the idol of 
Sheshnag is donated to one of them. A devotee who performs this austerity 
becomes free from all kinds of turbulence in his life and experiences peace 
and tranquility. 
KAM-VRATA  
This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Kartikeya and is observed in 
the bright half of the Hindu month-pausha. On the sixth day of this month, a 
devotee is expected to live on nothing else but fruits. Lord Kartikeya is also 
known by several other names- Shadanan, Senani, Kritikasut, Kumar, Skand, 
etc. The austerity concludes by feeding the Brahmins at the year end and 
making donations to them. A devotee who observes this austerity gets all his 
wishes fulfilled. 
AROGYA-VRATA  
This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Surya Narayan who is also 
known by several other names like Aditya, Bhaskar, Ravi, Bhanu, Diwakar, 
Prabhakar, etc. A devotee should observe a fast on the seventh day of any 
month and worship Lord Suryanarayan. The fast should be broken on the next 
day- ashtami. A devotee can continue this ritual for one year following the 
above mentioned rituals. A devotee who observes the rituals of this austerity 
becomes free from all kind of diseases and enjoys a healthy life. 
PUTRA-PRAPTI VRATA  

667 
 



This austerity commences on the eighth day of the bright half of the Hindu 
month-bhadrapad. 
The rituals consist of taking a 'sankalpa' on the preceding day (saptami) and 
worshipping Lord Sri Hari on the next day with appropriate rituals. Offerings 
are made to the sacrificial fire, which usually consist of articles like barley, 
sesame seeds, ghee, etc. The austerity concludes by feeding the invited 
Brahmins and making donations to them. This way the austerity continues for 
a year whereby a devotee observes fast on 'ashtami' of every month. A 
sonless person is blessed with a son if he observes this austerity with total 
devotion. This austerity which is popularly known as 'Krishna ashtami' also 
helps a devotee to become absolved of gravest of sin. 
SHAURYA AND SARVA BHAUM VRATA  
Shaurya and Sarva Bhaum vrata is related with the worship of Goddess Durga 
and is observed on the nineth day of the bright half of the Hindu month-
ashvin. The rituals commence by taking a 'sankalpa' as well as observing a fast 
on the preceding day (saptami). The fast is broken on the next day (ashtami) 
by having fruits. Cereals are excluded from the diet. One important aspect of 
this austerity is the worship of virgin girls along with Goddess Durga. One who 
observes the rituals of this austerity attains power valour and strength. Sarva 
bhaum vrata is related with the worship of all the ten directions, considered 
as Goddesses. A fast is observed on the tenth day of the bright half of the 
Hindu month-kartik and lasts for a year whereby a devotee observes fast on 
the tenth day (bright half) of every month that follows. One important 
charecteristic of this fast is that it is broken at the end of the day by having 
rice and curd. Making sacrifices in the name of all the ten directions are the 
inseparable part of this austerity. A devotee who observes this austerity 
lasting for a year remains invincible in whatever he does. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DHENU DAN TIL DHENU-DAN  
As the name implies, an idol of a cow made from powdered sesame seeds is 
donated to a Brahmin. The idol should weigh not less than sixteen 'prasthas' 

668 
 



(one prastha=four kudav, ancient units of weight measurment) Similarly a 
calf's idol made from powdered sesame seeds and weighing four 'prasthas' is 
donated to a Brahmin. Apart from these idols ofcow and calf a devotee should 
also donate 'deer-skin'. While donating these things, he should pray in the 
following way- 'O Til dhenu! Bless me so that I enjoy prosperity and never 
experience scarcity of any kind in my life.' The Brahmin receiving the donation 
should express his gratitude in the following way- O Goddess! I am receiving 
you in all humility. Bless and nurture my whole family.' A person who donates 
'Til Dhenu' gets all his wishes fulfilled and attains to Vishnu loka after his 
death. 
JAL-DHENU DAN  
The method of donating 'Jal Dhenu' is as follows-first of all small area of land 
is purified by coating it with cow dung and place two small pots are placed at 
the center. These pots are filled with different things like water, camphor, 
sandalwood, etc. The devotee should then imagine Goddess Jal Dhenu and 
her calf to be dwelling in those pots respectively. Both the pots are adequately 
adorned with various articles like sandalwood, flowers and then worshipped. 
After the completion of the rituals both the idols are donated to Brahmins. A 
person who donates Jal Dhenu or a Brahmin who accepts it attains to Vishnu 
loka after being absolved of all his sins. 
RASA DHENU DAN 
First of all, the area is purified by coating it with cow-dung after which a black 
deer-skin is spread on it alongwith 'kusha grass'. Two pots- one large and the 
other a small one are placed side by side. These pots are filled with sugarcane 
juice and symbolize 'Rasa-Dhenu' and the calf. 
Four sugarcanes symbolizing the four legs of 'Rasa-Dhenu' are fixed at four 
corners. After that, one small silver piece is placed at the base of each of the 
sugarcanes symbolizing hoofs. RasaDhenu is then adorned with colourful 
cloths and flowers. Again, four small pots filled with sesame seeds are kept at 
the four corners near Rasa-Dhenu. After the worship is accomplished, Rasa-

669 
 



Dhenu is donated to a Brahmin. A person who donates Rasa-Dhenu is 
liberated from all his sins and all his ancestors as well as the generations to 
come attain to the Heaven. 
GUD-DHENU DAN 
As it is amply clear by the name, in this ritual some jaggery is taken and given 
the shape of a cow and a calf. The land is purified by coating it with cow-dung. 
After that, a black deer-skin is spread on that purified area. Some kusha grass 
are then spread on the deer-skin and covered with a piece of cloth. Now, both 
the idols of cow and its calf are worshipped with appropriate rituals after 
which they are donated to Brahmins. A devotee should also should also 
donate shoes, umbrella and if possible, a gold ring to Brahmins. Donating a 
Gud-Dhenu enables a man to attain to such divine world where sages and 
hermits dwell. By doing thus,he also liberates his ancestors and the future 
generations. 
SHARKARA-DHENU DAN  
In this ritual, idols of a cow and a calf are made from sugar. After being 
worshipped they should be donated to a Brahmin. A devotee should live only 
on sugar for a day. Donating a Sharkara-Dhenu liberates a man from all his 
sins. Similarly, donating Madhu-Dhenu (made from honey), Kheer-Dhenu 
(made from rice and milk), Dadhi-Dhenu (curd), Navneet-Dhenu (made from 
butter), Lavan-Dhenu (salt) and Karpas-Dhenu (cotton) are all believed to 
bestow incomparable virtues to a devotee. 
SACRED PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE KOKAMUKH TIRTH  
Describing the holiness of Kokamukh tirth, Lord Varaha narrated a tale to 
Prithvi-" 
Once a fisherman was trying to catch a large fish in a lake situated at 
Kokamukh. Suddenly a hawk which was flying in the sky, descended down and 
after picking the fish in its beak tried to fly away. But as the fish was a large 
one, the hawk could not hold it for too long. As a result, the hawk fell on the 

670 
 



ground being unable to bear the weight of the fish. But amazingly, the hawk 
turned into a handsome prince as soon as it touched the ground.”  
“In the meantime, the fisherman's wife arrived there carrying some meat-
pieces in her hand. A kite, which was flying in the sky tried to snatch those 
meat-pieces. Seeing this, the fisherman killed that kite with one shot of his 
arrow. In course of time, the kite took rebirth as a princess of Chandrapur. She 
was extremely beautiful but hated men. Similarly, the fish was reborn as a 
prince. As the destiny would have liked it, both of them got married. There 
was a dramatic change in the attitude of the princess after the marriage as she 
no longer hated men. On the contrary, she loved her husband so much that 
she dreaded the thought of separation for even a moment.”  
“One day, the prince had a severe headache which showed no sign of 
subsiding. The princess became very worried and summoned the royal 
physician. The physician left no stone unturned to cure his royal physician but 
without any success. Somehow, the prince remembered everything about his 
previous birth and had a firm belief that he would be cured of his illness once 
he reached Kokamukh- the sacrosanct place of pilgrimage. So he decided to go 
there accompanied by the princess.”  
“Both of them reached a place at Kokamukh where they saw the remains 
(skeleton) of a fish lying on the ground. The prince revealed to his wife that he 
was a fish in his previous birth and that the skeleton was his. Then he went on 
to describe the cause of his headache which according to him was due to the 
injury sustained in his past birth when he had been badly mauled by a hawk. 
The princess was aware of her past birth as a kite, so she revealed how she 
had been killed by a fisherman in her previous birth. She also told her husband 
- 'Dying at Kokamukh in my previous birth prove to be a blessing to me as I 
was reborn as a princess. Had it not been so, I would certainly have not born 
as a princess.”  
“Both of them worshipped Lord Vishnu and as a result the prince was cured of 
his severe headache. Such is the greatness of Kokamukh- the reliever of all 
pains and miseries."  

671 
 



MAYAPURI (HARIDWAR)  
Narrating about the sanctity of Mayapuri, Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "There 
lived a Brahmin named Somsharma at Mayapuri. He was a great devotee of 
mine (lord Sri Hari) and had an impossible desire of witnessing my divine 
powers by his mortal eyes. I tried to make him understand about the futility of 
his desire but to no avail. Finally I was left with no option but to fulfil his wish. 
One day Somsharma had gone to take his bath in the holy Ganges. Hardly had 
he taken a dip than he found himself experiencing the pangs of birth in the 
womb of a nishad woman. Evidently, Lord Sri Hari had began giving a glimpse 
of his divine powers to Somsharma. 
It was a terrible experience for him and he vowed to lead a chaste life as soon 
as he came out of the womb.”  
“Unfortunately, he forgot everything about his vow once he took rebirth as a 
girl. In course of time, the girl grew up and married a young nishad. She had 
many children from him. 
One day, the nishad girl who in reality was Somsharma, went to take a bath in 
the holy Ganges. 
As soon as she entered into the river, she got transformed into a hermit. She 
was filled with extreme bewilderment but this was not the end, as there were 
more surprises to come.”  
“The hermit (previously nishad and originally Somsharma) came out of the 
river and looked all around in amazement. He then sat down to meditate and 
very soon he was engrossed in his meditation. In the evening, some sages 
arrived and said- 'Sir! How come you are sitting here? You had gone to take a 
bath. We became anxious and started searching for you when you did not 
return till evening.”  
“The hermit was bewildered by the turn of events as he was aware of every 
incident that had occured. He was also well aware that he had spent fifty 
years as nishad-woman, but according to the statements of hermits he had 
been absent only for few hours. The hermit was totally confused about his 

672 
 



real identity. I (lord Varaha) felt pity on his miserable condition and decided to 
lift my magic spell. I asked him whether his wish of witnessing my divine 
powers had been fulfilled or not. The hermit eulogized me and agreed that it 
was impossible for any mortal to understand the ways of Aimighty. I then 
blessed him and transformed him into Somsharma once again." Such is the 
grandeur of Mayapuri- the sacrosanct place where Lord Sri Hari has 
manifested his divine powers. A devotee who goes on a pilgrimage to 
Mayapuri never gets entangeled in the worldly illusions. 
KUBJAMRAK TIRTH (HRISHIKESH) 
Describing how Kubjamrak tirth derived its name, Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "In 
Satya Yuga, at the time when the earth was still submerged in water, I had 
killed two mighty demons named Madhu and Kaitabh. After killing both the 
demons I looked all around and found sage Raimya engrossed in his penance. 
Sage Raimya was a great devotee of mine. I was extremely impressed and 
watched him hiding myself behind a mango tree. The mango tree could not 
bear the weight of my hands and became curved. This is how Kubjamrak tirth 
derived its name. Very soon, sage Raimya found out that I was hiding behind 
that mango tree. He eulogized me and requested me to to grant a special 
status to Kubjamrak tirth among all the holy places. I blessed him and thus 
Kubjamrak tirth became one of the holiest places. There are several other holy 
places situated in the vicinity of Kubjamrak tirth, Manas tirth, Maya tirth, 
Sarvakamik tirth, Purnamukh tirth, Agni tirth, Shukra terth, Manasar tirth, 
Sapta samudrak tirth, etc. All these holy places including Kubjamrak tirth are 
capable of giving salvation to a man." BADRIKASHRAMA Continuing with his 
tale, Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "There is a sacred place in the Himalayas which 
is very inaccessible. It is famously known as Badrikashrama and holds an 
important place among all the holy places. One who makes a pilgrimage to 
that place gets all his wishes fulfilled. 
There is a reservoir at the mountain top called Brahma kund. One who 
observes fast for three consecutive nights and takes a holy dip in that 
reservoir attains virtues similar to "Agnishtom yagya". One who takes his last 

673 
 



birth in its vicinity certainly attains to my abode. There are several other holy 
places in the vicinity of Badrikashrama like Agnisatya pad, Indra loka, Satya 
loka, Chatuhsrota, Ved dhar, etc. Ved dhar is the same place where the vedas 
had manifested from Lord Brahma's mouth. 
MANDAR TIRTH  
Mandar tirth is named after a celestial tree called Mandar. This sacred place of 
pilgrimage is situated at the foothills of Vindhya mountain. There is a large 
mandar tree over there which has some unique qualities. This tree is visible 
only on auspicious days of dwadashi and chaturdashi and becomes invisible on 
the rest of the days. Some other holy places situated in the vicinity of mandar 
tirth are Prapan, Modan, Baikunthkaran. 
There is another holy place called mandar but it is situated on the Meru 
mountain. This holy place is also known as 'Syamantpanchak'. One important 
characteristic of this holy place is that there are huge rocks resembling a 
mace, a wheel, a plough and a conch. 
SOMESHWAR LINGA  
Chandra deva had once performed an austere penance to get absolved from 
the curse of his Daksha Prajapati his father-in-law. During the course of his 
penance Chandra deva made a Shivalinga and worshipped it. Finally Lord Shiva 
appeared and agreed to dwell in that particular Shivalinga as per the request 
of Chandra deva. There is a reservoir situated to the south of Someshwar 
temple which is believed to liberate a man from all his sins. In course of time 
this place became famous as Someshwar linga. 
SHALGRAM KSHETRA  
Prithvi requested Lord Varaha to shed light on the famous penance which 
sage Shalankayan had performed. Lord Varaha narrated the following tale- 
"Long long ago sage Shalankayan did an austere penance to please me (lord 
Vishnu). There was a 'sal' tree nearby and the sage was ignorant of the fact 
that I dwell in that sacred tree. When I appeared, he requested me to bless 
him with a divine son who had qualities like Lord Shiva. I revealed to him that 

674 
 



his son (Nandikeshwar) had already manifested and was presently staying at 
'Vraja' (Mathura). I also revealed to him that although I was present in the 'sal' 
tree but he was unware of this fact because of his ignorance. In course of 
time, this very place became famous as 'Shalgram tirth'. A devotee who makes 
a pilgrimage to this holy place is liberated from all kinds of worldly bondages." 
RURU KSHETRA Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "This holy place is named after Ruru, 
the daughter of Devadutt and an apsara named Pramalocha. Devadutt came 
from the lineage of sage Bhrigu.  
Once Devadutt did an austere penance to please Lord Shiva. His penance 
continued for ten thousand years. Indra became worried and sent a beautiful 
apsara named Pramalocha to disturb his penance. 
Unfortunately Devadutt fell into the trap laid by Indra. He was infatuated by 
Pramalocha's divine beauty and enjoyed an intimate life with her for a long 
time. Finally he realized his mistake and regretted his foolishness. He decided 
to abandon Pramalocha and recommence his penance. 
Ultimately he was successful in pleasing Lord Shiva and attaining to Shiva 
loka.”  
“Meanwhile Pramalocha who was pregnant, gave birth to a girl child and died. 
The baby girl was nurtured and brought up by a deer named Ruru after whom 
she got her own name. In course of time Ruru grew up and decided to please 
Lord Vishnu by her penance. She did an austere penance for one hundred 
years by remaining still at a place. At last I (lord Vishnu) became pleased by 
her total devotion and appeared before her. She requested me to name that 
place on her. I blessed her and thus that place became famous as Ruru 
kshetra." GONISHKRAMAN TIRTH Lord Shiva told Prithvi- "Gonishkraman tirth 
is situated in the Himalayas. Sage Aurva had his hermitage at this sacred place 
which was incidentally burnt to ashes by Lord Shiva. Aurva cursed Shiva as the 
result of which Shiva started wandering throughout the world in a restless 
manner.”  
“ 

675 
 



Once, Lord Shiva visited the hermitage of sage Aurvanam accompanied by his 
consort-Uma. 
The purpose of the visit was to seek Aurvanam's help in curing his 
restlessness. Sage Aurvanam advised him to have a bath with the milk of 
Surabhi cow. I (lord Vishnu) then brought down seventy-seven Surabhi cows 
from the heaven and thus helped Shiva take bath with their milk. At last, 
Shiva's reastlessness came to an end and this holy place became famous as 
'Gonishkraman' tirth." STOOTSWAMI TIRTH Lord Varaha then went on to 
describe the greatness of Stootswami tirth and told Prithvi- "I shall incarnate 
as Krishna at this place in the era of dwapar. I shall take birth in the house of 
Vasudeva and Devaki. There is a pond situated at about 5 kosas from 
Stootswami tirth. Anybody who take holy dips in its holy water for five days 
becomes absolved of all his sins. DWARKA Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "There is a 
holy place called 'Panchsar' in Dwarka. Anybody who stays there for six days 
and takes holy dips in 'Panchasar' enjoys all the pleasures of life. Dwarka is 
situated at the sea-shore and the crocodiles living there never trouble people 
taking their bath. 
These crocodiles also have one unique characteristic- they never eat anything 
that is offered to them by a sinner but unhesitatingly accept anything from a 
virtuous person. There are several other holy places in and around Dwarka- 
Panchpind, Hanskunda, Hanstirth, Chakratirth, Raivatak, Vishnu-sankarama, 
etc. Vishnu sankarama is the very place where I, in my incarnation as Krishna 
would be killed by a hunter named Jara. 
SANANDOOR TIRTH  
This holy place is situated between Malay mountain and the ocean. Nearby, 
there is another place called Sangaman where Sri Rama while on his way to 
Lanka had confronted the ocean. 
There are also many other sacred places in the vicinity like Shakrasar, 
Shurparak, etc. There are hermitages of Rama and Parshurama at Shurparak. 
LOHARGAL TIRTH  

676 
 



Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "There is a region inhabited by mlecchas, situated at 
the distance of some 30 yojans. This region is surrounded by Himalaya 
mountain in its central as well as southern parts. Lohargal tirth is situated near 
this region and is well protected by nature which makes it very inaccessible.  
Once demons tried to invade this holy place but all of them were killed by me 
(Sri Hari). I also protected Brahma and Rudra from the wrath of the demons 
and named that place Lohargal. Lohargal is the most sacred place of 
pilgrimage and spread in the area of 25 yojans. It is a self manifested place 
and has immense religious significance. 
MATHURA  
Describing the majesty of Mathura, Lord Varaha told Prithvi- "Mathura is very 
dear to me because this is the very place where I shall be taking incarnation as 
Krishna. Mathura is the most sacrosanct place and no other holy place can be 
compared to it. There are many other holy places in and around Mathura- 
Vishranti, Surya tirth, Koti tirth, Vayu tirth, etc. Each one of them has its own 
religious significance. A holy pond named 'Vatsa-krindan' lies in Mathura 
region. Anybody taking a holy dip in that holy pond is certain to attain to the 
abode of 'Vayu'. In the vicinity lies Vrindavan, the holiest place which would 
be witness to many of my divine plays." CHAKRA TIRTH It is situated to the 
north of Mathura and Lord Bhadreshwar has his dwelling place over there. A 
person who makes a pilgrimage to Chakra tirth and observes a fast for a day 
becomes absolved of heinous of sins. KAPILA TIRTH Describing the origin of 
'Kapila Varaha' (an idol of Lord Varaha made by sage Kapila) Lord Varaha told 
Prithvi- "Sage Kapila was a great devotee of mine. He had made my idol and 
worshipped it regularly. Later on, Indra acquired it and started worshipping it. 
The demon king Ravana took it to Lanka after defeating Indra in a battle. In 
Treta Yuga I (Sri Rama) defeated him and made Vibhishan, his brother the king 
of Lanka. This way, the idol came under the possession of Vibhishan but he 
agreed to part with it at my request. This was how I brought that idol to 
Ayodhya. After reaching Ayodhya, I presented it to Shatrughan as a reward for 

677 
 



killing Lavanasur. Later on, while Shatrughan was going to Mathura he carried 
that idol along with him."  
GOVARDHAN TIRTH  
Lord Varaha, continuing with the description of various holy places told Prithvi 
about the magnificence of Govardhan parvat- "Govardhan parvat is situated 
near Mathura. It will have great religious importance because it will witness a 
great feat of mine in Dwapar Yuga. I shall lift this mountain to protect people 
from the incessant rain caused by Indra. There are numerous holy places of 
great religious significance in the vicinity of Govardhan mountain like Indra 
tirth, Yama tirth, Varuna tirth and Kubera tirth. There is also a famous fresh-
water lake called 'Kadamb khand' where people perform tarpan of their 
ancestors."  
GOKARNA TIRTH 
Lord Varaha told Prithvi about the greatness of Gokarna tirth- "Long long ago 
there lived a vaishya named Vasukarn at Mathura. Sushila, his wife was deeply 
religious but inspite of that she was issueless. One day, she had gone to take 
her bath in river Saraswati where she found many women taking their bath. 
The children of these women were playing nearby. Sushila became very sad 
and being unable to control her emotions started crying.”  
“A sage saw her crying and asked her as to what made her so sad. Sushila 
narrated her woeful tale to him. The sage took pity on her and advised her to 
worship Lord Gokarna. The sage said- 'You will definitely be blessed with a 
son.' Sushila went home and narrated the whole incident to her husband. 
Both of them started worshipping Lord Gokarna Mahadeva with total 
devotion. 
After ten years, a son was born to them. Vasukarn named that child after Lord 
Gokarna to express his gratitude to the deity.”  
“In course of time, Gokarna grew up and got married but even after a long 
time he did not have a progeny. So his father married him to three more 
women, one after another, but even this did not prove to be of any help to 

678 
 



Gokarna because he remained a sonless person. This made Gokarna very sad 
and he engaged himself in various charitable activities thinking that the 
virtues thus attained might bless him in begetting a son. He got constructed 
many temples and ordered wells to be dug up for the benifit of the travellers. 
Very soon, all his money was spent and he became worried about the future 
of his family. So he decided to go to distant places to earn wealth.”  
“ 
Once while on his journey he met a divine parrot who possessed tremendous 
knowledge. Gokarna was very much impressed by the parrot's knowledge. He 
asked the parrot from where had it imbibed such divine knowledge. The 
parrot revealed to him that he was Shukodar in its previous birth and was a 
learned man. He had attained the form of parrot due to the curse of sage 
Shukdev. But sage Shukdev had been kind enough to allow him to retain all 
the knowledge in his next birth. The parrot also told Gokarna how it had been 
kept inside a cage by a fowler and requested him to help it out from the 
captivity.”  
“Gokarna requested the fowler to give the learned parrot to him. The fowler 
agreed but asked for all the virtues attained by Gokarna in return. Gokarna 
happily agreed to donate all his virtues and proceeded with that parrot. Now, 
Gokarna had become bereft of all his virtues he had attained so far.  
Once while he was on a voyage in connection with his trade the ship was 
caught in a severe cyclone and the chances of survival looked very bleak. All 
his fellow travellers had a misconception that they had been struck by the 
misfortune only because of Gokarna's sins. The parrot was saddened after 
hearing what people said about his master. It decided to help him and flew 
away towards north. While flying it found a Vishnu temple where many divine 
women and other creatures had gathered to worship. The descendants of 
Jatayu were also among them. The parrot narrated the woeful tale of his 
master to all of them. All the divine birds decided to help Gokarna.”  

679 
 



“The divine birds instructed the parrot to follow them and then flew towards 
the place where Gokarna's ship was stranded. Finally, they were successful in 
rescuing Gokarna and bringing him back to the same temple. Gokarna 
worshipped Lord Keshav and performed the rituals of tarpan in the name of 
his ancestors. In the meantime, all the divine women also arrived there to 
worship. 
They were pleased to meet Gokarna and gave him divine food to eat. They 
also allowed him to stay there for as long as he wished.”  
“Meanwhile the ship managed to reach the sea shore. Gokarna's companions 
met his parents and narrated the whole incident to him. Gokarna's parents 
were filled with sorrow at the fate of their son. On the other hand, Gokarna 
continued to live in that temple for a long period. He was worried about his 
father as it had been a long time since he saw him. He sent the parrot to bring 
his news. The parrot flew away to Mathura and met his father-Vasukarn. 
Vasukarn thanked the parrot for saving his son's life. The parrot then flew 
back on his return journey and gave the good news to Gokarna.”  
“One day Gokarna found the divine ladies extremely sad. When asked, they 
told him that the king of Ayodhya had destroyed the beautiful gardens of 
Mathura and this was the reason for their sadness. Gokarna assured them 
that he would convince the king to abandon his evil plan if he got a chance to 
meet him. The divine women then provided Gokarna with a divine aircraft 
boarded on which he reached Mathura. Gokarna met the king and managed 
to convince him against destroying beautiful gardens. The king was extrtemely 
impressed by his knowledge and presented great amount of wealth to him. 
This way all the divine women became happy once again.”  
“Gokarna then went home and met his family members. His parents and his 
wives were very pleased to see him. Gokarna then got constructed a Shukdev 
temple to honor his saviour- the learned parrot. It was only because of that 
parrot that he could acquire such wisdom and knowledge. To express his 
gratitude to the fowler he donated all the virtues he had acquired by taking 
bath in the holy confluence (triveni) because had it not been for the fowler he 

680 
 



would never have got the knowledgeable parrot. Gokarna lived happily for a 
long time."  
INSTALLATION OF IDOLS 
IDOL MADE OF WOOD  
Prithvi requested Lord Varaha to describe the proper methods of installing 
various types of idols. 
Lord Varaha replied that a devotee desirous of making a wooden idol must 
select the wood of 'Bassia latifolia' for his purpose. The wood should be 
purified and then given shape as per the appearance of the deity. The idol is 
then installed in a temple amidst the performance of appropriate rituals. 
During installation ceremony various articles like camphor, vermillion, 
sandalwood, incense, etc. are offered to the deity. The swastika mark is a sign 
of auspiciousness so the devotee must keep this in mind while giving shape to 
the idol. 
This swastika mark must be carved out on the idol. Similarly, other signs of 
Lord Vishnu like 'srivatsa' and 'kaushtubh' should also be carved out on the 
idol. Lord Vishnu is then invoked and requested to dwell within that idol by 
chanting mantras. After the deity has been invoked, the 'wood' no longer 
remains a lifeless structure but it becomes the embodiment of the deity. The 
idol is then considered to be fit for worship. While worshipping, a devotee 
should offer a bhoga of kheer to the deity. Burning a ghee or sesame-oil lamp 
in front of the deity is considered good. 
The devotee should then circumambulate around the temple premise. While 
circumambulating, he should keep on chanting the sacred mantra 'om namo 
narayanay'. The idol thus installed should be worshipped daily without 
failure."  
STONE- IDOL  
"A proficient sculptor should be chosen to carve out the deity's shape from a 
pure and spotless stone. 

681 
 



First of all the sculptor should clearly draw the outline of deity's appearance 
on the stone with a marker and then carefully carve it out from the stone. The 
idol is then purified by sprinkling 'akshat' on the deity's idol. While 
worshipping a devotee should burn a ghee lamp and invoke Lord Vishnu to 
dwell in that idol by chanting the sacred mantra- om namo narayanay. The 
installation of idol being complete, he should observe a fast for the whole 
night. Next morning, after finishing his daily chores he should put on white 
clothes and change his old 'yagyopavit' with a new one. The idol thus made is 
considered fit to be worshipped. Purva-bhadrapad is considered to be the best 
time for the installation of a stone-idol. During the course of installation 
ceremony, a devotee should live either on milk or cereal like barley. The 
rituals of worship consist of numerous activities like lighting four lamps in 
front of the deity, keeping four small pots each filled up with articles like 
'panchagavya', water, sandalwood and milk. The rituals of worship are 
considered to be incomplete without the chantings of vedic mantras."  
EARTHEN AND COPPER IDOLS 
"A devotee should carefully make a beautiful earthen idol without any sign of 
crack. The most auspicious time for the installation of an earthen idol is said to 
be during 'Shravana nakshatra'. 
An invocation is made to the deity to dwell within the idol after which 
ablution of the idol is performed with the help of various articles like holy 
water, panchagavya, sandalwood, etc. The rituals of worship are similar to 
that of woodden or stone-idol.”  
“The best time for the installation of copper idol is said to be during 'chitra' 
nakshatra. The idol should be installed facing north and should be purified 
with the help of holy water, panchagavya, etc. Then the deity is invoked to 
dwell within the idol. The invocation is made by chanting sacred mantras. Now 
the idol is fit to be worshipped. The rituals are same as mentioned earlier." 
BRONZE IDOL "The most auspicious time for the installation of bronze-idol is 
said to be during jyeshtha nakshatra. The idol should be installed facing north. 
At the time of installation the devotee must not forget to keep four small pots 

682 
 



in front of the deity, each filled with articles like 'panchgavya' water, 
sandalwood and honey. The rituals of invocation as well as worship are same 
as mentioned earlier." SILVER AND GOLD IDOLS "The rituals for the installation 
of silver or gold idols are similar to that of copper or bronze idol. 
Prithvi requested Lord Varaha to reveal the name of deities whom a devotee 
can worship at home. 
Lord Vishnu replied- "A devotee can worship any deity at home but worship of 
two Shivalingas is prohibited. Similarly a devotee should never worship three 
Shaligrams or three Durga idols or two Surya idols. A devotee should also 
never worship Shaligrams adding up to odd numbers- 3, 5, 7, etc. But there is 
no harm in worshipping one Shaligram. A devotee must never worship broken 
or cracked idol because it does not bode well for the worshipper. A 'chakra' 
mark on the Shaligram is considered as very auspicious and it can be 
worshipped even if the idol is broken or cracked. The virtues attained by 
worshipping twelve Shaligrams are similar to that of worshipping twelve crore 
Shivalingas. Partaking of 'charnamrit' that has been offered to Shaligram 
absolves a man from all his sins. Anybody who either buys or sells a Shaligram 
is certain to go to hell."  
RITUALS PERTAINING TO LAST RITES PITRA YAGYA  
Prithvi requested Lord Varaha to define the meaning of 'Pitra' yagya (rituals 
pertaining to last rite) and its significance. Lord Varaha replied- "Sage Nimi 
was the first person to perform the the rituals of pitra-yagya after the death of 
his son Atreya. Sage Atreya is famous for his penance which he did for ten 
thousand years. When Atreya died, his father-Nimi was filled with grief. 
Nimi tried his best to overcome his sorrow but to no avail. He mourned his 
son's death for three consecutive nights. He thought that perhaps the 
performance of 'shradha' rituals would be the best means to get rid of his 
sorrow. So he decided to perform the 'shradha' rituals on the twelfth day of 
'magh'. On that day, he invited many Brahmins and fed them with the same 
delicacies which Atreya would have liked to eat. He performed all the rituals 

683 
 



well within a day which would otherwise have taken a week to perform. He 
also performed the rituals of 'pinda dan' by donating cereals, vegetables and 
fruits. While performing the rituals of pinda-dan, he took some kusha grass in 
his hands and after pointing it towards south chanted Atreya's name and 
gotra.  
In the night, Nimi sat on the seat of deer-skin underneath which kusha grass 
had been spread. He then tried to concentrate on the tip of the nose. But in 
spite of all his efforts there was no sign of mental peace he was so desperately 
seeking and thought of his dead son continued to torment him."  
"Nimi was troubled by a guilt that perhaps he had set a bad precedent by 
performing the rituals of pinda dan because nobody in the past had ever 
performed the rituals. He was worried as to what would the coming 
generation think of him. He was so much troubled by the thought that he 
could not sleep for the whole night. Next morning he got up, still worried. He 
remained in a disturbed state of mind for many days. At last, when it became 
too much for him to handle, he decided to end his life. In the meantime, sage 
Narada arrived there and assured him that there was nothing to be worried 
about as whatever he had done was most appropriate. Narada also convinced 
him that even his (Nimi's) dead father would vouch for this fact."  
Nimi remembered his father who had died long ago. His father revealed to 
him that the rituals which he had performed were in fact the rituals of 'pitra-
yagya'. Describing the importance of pitra-yagya Nemi's father told him- 'The 
name pitra-yagya' was given by none other than Lord Brahma himself who 
was the first one to perform the rituals. Later on, Lord Brahma had described 
the rituals to Narada and this is why Narada was convinced that you had 
committed no wrong.  
Nemi's father then described as to what should be done with regard to the 
person who lay dying- 'When the death approaches a person loses his 
consciousness and becomes extremely fearful. At that time, a Brahmin should 
constantly study the scriptures so that he could die in peace. Donating a cow 
helps to pacify the soul of a dead person. If sacred mantras are whispered in 

684 
 



the ears of a dying person he dies peacefully. When the death seems 
imminent, a morsel of 'Madhupark' (mixture of curd, water, honey and 
clarified butter) should be kept in the mouth of the dying person. While doing 
this one should pray to the almighty to liberate the dead man's soul.'  
'The dead body should then be carried and kept under a tree where it is 
purified by smearing ghee, oil, perfumes, etc. It is then carried to cremation 
ground and kept at the bank of a river-feet pointing towards south. After this, 
the dead body should be bathed by remembering all the sacred places of 
pilgrimage. It should then be kept on the pyre-feet pointing south. The pyre 
should be lit and the following prayer should be said-O Agnideva! I pray to you 
to burn all the sins committed by this person so that he attains to heaven. 
Now, circumambulation around the pyre is made and the pyre is lit towards 
the head side. After consigning the dead body to flames, the rituals of 'tarpan' 
and 'pinda-dan' are performed. 
All the people assembled there should purify themselves before returning 
home. The period starting from the time the dead body is consigned to flames 
till the next ten days is called 'Ashaucha'. It is applicable to all the relatives 
coming from the same gotra of the deceased.'  
ASHAUCHA AND PINDA KALPA 
'Ashaucha' means impurity, so it is the period during which the son of the 
deceased is considered to be impure. The period begins from the day on 
which the death has occurred and continues for the following ten days. 
Varaha 'Pinda-dan' means offering certain kind of food to the deceased in the 
belief that it would satiate his soul. Lord Varaha, while describing about the 
rituals which are supposed to be performed during the period of ashaucha 
and also the rituals of making pinda dan, told Prithvi- "The observer of 
shradha rituals should take his bath in a river on the third day from the day on 
which death has occured. After taking his bath, he should offer three 'pindas' 
(consisting of cereal flour) as well as three palmful of water into the river in 
the name of the deceased. On the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh days, he 
should make offerings of one pinda and one palmful of water in the name of 

685 
 



the deceased. He should never make offerings of the Pindas at the same place 
on the contrary he should select diferent spots for this purpose."  
"On the tenth day he should get his hair tonsured and change his clothes. His 
relatives (samegotra) should take their bath after applying an ointment 
prepared from sesame seeds, amla and oil on their bodies. 'Ekodishta 
Shradha' is performed on the eleventh day. For this ritual to be performed, 
the concerned person should first purify himself and then offer Pinda to the 
deceased person as well as other manes. The rituals of Ekodishta Shradha are 
same for all the four castes. 
The Brahmins should be invited and fed on the thirteenth day. While feeding 
the Brahmins a religious vow (Sankalpa) is taken in the name of the deceased 
person."  
"For the purpose of offering 'pinda', an 'altar' should be made at river-bank or 
any other suitable place. The rituals can be performed either facing south or 
east. Offering  64 (Pindas) is considered to be ideal. Pinda dan can also be 
made under a peepal tree but the place should be well protected from the 
reach of animals like dogs, cock, pigs, etc. It is believed that if these animals 
visit the place where 'Pinda dan' is being made then it becomes difficult for 
the soul to attain liberation.  
The rituals of Pinda dan should be performed at a pure place otherwise there 
is a fear of soul going to hell. The name and the gotra of the deceased person 
should be pronounced while performing the rituals. After the rituals are 
complete all the assembled persons may sit down to have their meal." 
Donating things like an umbrella, clothes, cereals, ornaments to the Brahmins 
are believed to be auspicious. 
THE FLAWED SHRADHA AND ITS PREVENTION  
Prithvi requested Lord Varaha to describe about the mistakes committed 
during shradha rituals and how they could be prevented-- Lord Varaha 
replied---It is a grave sin to partake of a meal meant for the soul of the 
deceased person. Anybody who has committed this sin should atone for his 

686 
 



sin by observing a fast for full day and a night. He also has to perform many 
other rituals like taking bath in a river flowing eastward, performing tarpan, 
making offerings of sesame seeds into the fire, Shanti path, Mangal path etc. 
Partaking of 'Pancha-gavya' (a mixture of cow's milk, cow's urine, cow-dung, 
curd and charified butter) or 'Madhupark' is also believed to purify such a 
person.”  
“Similarly, showing disrespect to the invited Brahmins is also considered to be 
a grave sin. 
Donating articles to unworthy Brahmins is also considered to be an 
inappropriate act. The performer of Shradha should refrain from all these 
acts."  
PREPARATION OF 'MADHUPARK'  
While describing the method of preparing Madhupark, Lord Varaha told 
Prithvi--"Madhupark" manifested from the right half of my body at the time 
when the process of creation began. This is the reason why it is so pure. 
Anybody who makes offering of Madhupark in the course of my worship, 
attains to my abode. For the preparation of Madhupark honey, curd and ghee 
are mixed in equal proportion. While preparing it sacred mantras in my praise 
should be constantly chanted. 
Giving some Madhupark to a dying man liberates his soul."  
DESCRIPTION OF HELL - NACHIKETA'S EXPERIENCE  
Once, Janmejay asked Sage Vaishampayan about Yamrajpuri and its location. 
He also wanted to know as to what should a man do so that he does not have 
to go there. 
Sage Vaishampayan narrated the tale of Nachiketa, one of the few blessed 
persons to have visited Yamarajpuri with his mortal body-- "Long Long ago, 
there lived a Sage named Uddyalak. 
He had a son named Nachiketa. One day, while Uddyalak was performing 
a'Yagya', Nachiketa arrived there and disturbed him by repeatedly asking- 'To 

687 
 



whom will you give me?' Sage Uddyalak, in a fit of rage cursed Nachiketa to go 
to hell. But after he cooled down, he regretted for having cursed his dear son. 
Nachiketa being an obedient son was ready to go to hell. His father tried his 
best to convince him against doing this but to no avail. Nachiketa assured his 
father that he would return safely after visiting Yampuri."  
"Thus, Nachiketa went to Yampuri and met Yamaraj---the Lord of death. He 
stayed there for some days and witnessed all the events taking place over 
there. Ultimately he sought Yamaraj's permission to return. When he returned 
home, his father was extremely delighted to find his son alive. Very soon, the 
place was thronged by many people and everybody was curious to know 
about his experiences during his stay in the hell. Nachiketa replied-- Sinners 
like liars, greedy people, jealous people, caluminators, treacherers etc, go to 
hell. Similarly, one who kills a child or a woman, or kills a Brahmin, or one who 
criticizes the Vedas, or lends money on interest, or one who abandons his 
parents or faithful wife, or one who ciritizes his guru, or one who sells liquor, 
or a Brahmin who sells Vedas, goes to hell and tastes the fruits of his sinul 
actions.”  
“Yamapuri is made of gold and spread in the area of one thousand yojan. It is 
well fortified and it is impossible for anybody to tresspass its territory. I saw 
sinners experiencing unbearable torture over there. I also saw couple of rivers 
flowing there--Pushpodaka, at the bank of which there are trees in abundance 
and Vaivaswati, which flows through the central part of Yamapuri. 
Vaivaswati contains divine water which never dries up. Yamapuri has two 
entrances---one through which only virtuous souls like sages and hermits are 
allowed to enter and the second through which sinners enter Yamapuri. The 
former entrance is such that even heat loses its quality in its vicinity. The latter 
entrance is situated in the south and has a large iron gate. I also saw three 
large ditches called 'Audoombar', 'Avirchiman' and 'Uchchavach' which are 
meant for the sinners. Sinners are also forced to pass through the flames that 
continuously keep on errupting to the west of Yamapuri. 

688 
 



"I saw a grand assembly hall where truthful and virtuous people live. It is 
graced by the presence of sages like Manu, Vyasa, Atri, Gautam, Angira, 
Bhrigu and others. There, I saw a Goddess who is worshipped by Yamaraj. The 
Goddess controls all the functions of the world. I also saw the ferocious Kala. 
He possesses extreme anger and is very powerful. Time does not have any 
influence on him as the result of which he enjoys eternal youth. I also saw 
various types of demons and giants in the hell." I saw many messengers of 
Yamaraj punishing the sinners. Some were beating the sinners with sticks in 
their hands while some sinners were being forced to enter fire. I saw all the 
sinners wailing and repenting for their sinful deeds. Many sinners were kept at 
a very dark place where there was no light. Those who had committed graver 
sins were put in boiling oil. I saw many sinners being given all sorts of severe 
punishment. I saw a place where iron nails were spread all around. This was 
the place where people who breached the modesty of women were given 
punishment.”  
“I saw ten different hells--Tapta, Mahatapt, Raurav, etc. Each of the latter is 
more ferocious than the former. The sinners are sent to all these hells on the 
basis of the gravity of their sins. Yamaraj himself instructs chitragupta on the 
punishment to be given to these sinners." KARMA VIPAK Karma Vipak means 
the fruits one reaps according to his or her Karma. While continuing with the 
description of various aspects of hell, Nachiketa told the assembled sages--At 
Yamapuri, Chitragupta goes through the record of all the deeds, committed by 
a man when he was alive and brings into the notice of Yamaraj. 
Yamaraj then decides upon the punishment to be given to the concerned soul. 
The punishment can be varied like if the soul was virtuous then it would be 
sent to heaven, or the soul may even be made to take birth as a tree, or an 
animal or any other creature. Sinners like those who had remained disinclined 
towards any kind of virtuous deed, or those who had abandoned their faithful 
wives, were sent to the hell named Raurav. The souls of virtuous people were 
sent to the heaven. Those who had extreme attachment to women took 
rebirth as human beings. People who had attained martyrdom while fighting a 

689 
 



battle were sent to Indrapuri. Those who had engaged themselves in virtuous 
deeds throughout their lives were rewarded for their good deeds."  
VIRTUES OF CHASTITY  
First of all, the area is purified by coating it with cow-dung after which a black 
deer-skin is spread on it alongwith 'kusha grass'. Two pots- one large and the 
other a small one are placed side by side. These pots are filled with sugarcane 
juice and symbolize 'Rasa-Dhenu' and the calf. 
Four sugarcanes symbolizing the four legs of 'Rasa-Dhenu' are fixed at four 
corners. After that, one small silver piece is placed at the base of each of the 
sugarcanes symbolizing hoofs. Rasa-Dhenu is then adorned with colourful 
cloths and flowers. Again, four small pots filled with sesame seeds are kept at 
the four corners near Rasa-Dhenu. After the worship is accomplished, Rasa-
Dhenu is donated to a Brahmin. A person who donates Rasa-Dhenu is 
liberated from all his sins and all his ancestors as well as the generations to 
come attain to the Heaven. 
LIBERATION FROM SINS  
Narada asked Yamaraj about the reason why joy was so elusive to human 
beings. He also wanted to know about the reasons for man's sorrows. 
Yamaraj replied---Man's destiny is defined by his own actions. He has to taste 
the fruits of his actions. He has to taste the fruits of his each and every 
actions. So when a man finds himself amidst sorrows he must realize that he is 
reaping the fruits of his past actions. If a man commits virtuous deeds then joy 
is experienced but sinful deeds invite sorrows and miseries. Desires force a 
man to take countless birth. A man takes birth on the basis of his past karmas. 
God does not interfere in this matter. So, only foolish people curse God for 
their miseries. They forget that their sorrows are of their own making. A man 
can liberate himself from sins by engaging in virtuous deeds and abstaining 
from sinful deeds. A man should perform his duties with a sense of 
detachment, because attachment results into the transmigration of the soul. 

690 
 



Lord Brahma has declared that 'Shishumar chakra' is the symbolic expression 
of his own self. 
Anybody desirous of getting liberated from his sins must make an image of 
this chakra and worship it. One who visualises this chakra within his body, too, 
becomes liberated from his sins. 
Mental worship of various planets (Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, Saturn, Mars etc.) 
visualized at the various points of this chakra helps a man to become liberated 
from all the sins. Similarly, practising Pranayama for hundred times helps a 
man to become liberated from all the sins. The most easiest way to become 
liberated from sins is by engaging oneself in the servitude of a cow. 
This deed is as virtuous as making pilgrimages to all the sacred places 
together. Observing fast on Ekadashi also helps a man to become liberated 
from his sins." Having finished his narrations, Nachiketa, looked at the sages, 
who were listening with rapt attention. The sages thanked Nachiketa for 
enlightening them on the sacred place called Yamapuri. 
MISCELLANEOUS STORIES GOKARNESHWAR  
The famous battle of 'Tarakamaya' had ended. The deities after having 
defeated the demons had once again regained the control of heaven. Lord 
Brahma being satisfied with the postive outcome of the war was engrossed in 
his meditation when Sanatkumar arrived and asked--"O Lord! I am anxious to 
know about the origin of three famous Shivalingas--Uttar-Gokarn, Dakshain-
Gokarn and Sringeshwar. What made Lord Shiva to take the form of a deer 
(Gokarn)? Please enlighten me on all these subjects." Lord Brahma replied--
The northern peak of Mandarachal mountain is famously known as 
Munjawan. This place is divinely beautiful and the stones and rocks over there 
glitter like diamonds. It has many rivers, lakes and springs. The atmosphere 
over there is so serene that even the deities are tempted to have their abodes 
at that place. This sacred place is graced by the presence of 'Sthanu 
Maheshwar'. 

691 
 



Nandi-- the Lord of all the Ganas of Shiva, was a virtuous Brahmin in Treta 
Yuga.  
Once, he did an austere penance to realize Lord Shiva. The penance lasted for 
one thousand years. At last Lord Shiva became pleased and appeared before 
him. Lord Shiva blessed Nandi with an appearance similar to him (Shiva). 
Lord Shiva said-- From today onwards you will be blessed with three eyes just 
like me. You will be worshipped by the deities and demons alike. You will be 
immortal and time and age will have no effect upon you. You are being 
granted with the lordship of all my Ganas. It will be your duty to stand guard 
at the entrance of my dwelling place. 
Lord Shiva then informed Nandi that in a short time the deities would be 
visiting him (Nandi). 
Due to some reason Lord Shiva had pledged not to give deities an opportunity 
to see his physical form. So, after blessing Nandi, Shiva disappeared and went 
to live in Sleshmatak forest in the form of a deer. Nandi was unaware of this 
fact. 
Meanwhile, after being blessed by Shiva, Nandi had attained a divinely radiant 
form. When the deities saw Nandi possessing three eyes instead of two, they 
immediately understood that this could not have happened without the 
blessing of Lord Shiva. 
All the deities arrived at Munjawan peak and requested Nandi to reveal 
Shiva's whereabouts. 
Nandi expressed his helplessness and told them that he was not aware where 
Shiva went after blessing him. He requested the deities to find out Shiva on 
their own. The deities searched for Shiva in all the three worlds but could not 
find him. I (Lord Brahma) was also present in the search-team of the deities. I 
sat down to meditate. In the deep state of meditation, I came to know that 
Shiva was living in the form of a deer in Sleshmatak forest. I revealed this fact 
to the deities. 

692 
 



All the deities then went into the Sleshmatak forest and recognised Shiva 
living in the form of a deer. The deer (Shiva) had one horn on its head. All the 
deities ran towards the deer with the desire of catching hold of it. Indra held 
the topmost part of the horn with a firm grip while I (Lord Brahma) held its 
middle portion. Similarly, Lord Vishnu held the lower part. Very soon, the horn 
got uprooted because of the force which was being applied on it. Lord Shiva 
vanished out of our sight. We were left behind with three pieces of horn in 
our hands. We cursed ourselves for our bad luck. Suddenly, we heard Shiva's 
voice instructing us to install those pieces of horns at that very place and 
worship them. The upper part of the horn became famous as Uttar Gokarn, 
while its middle portion became famous as Dakshain Gokarn. The part of the 
horn, which Vishnu installed became famous as 'Sringeshwar'. All these three 
places have incomparable religious significance and are situated in Nepal. 
Sleshmatak forest is situated at the distance of 2 miles from the famous 
Pashupatinath temple." Sanatkumar thanked Lord Brahma for enlightening 
him on these secret topics. 
THE MEANS OF VISHNU REALIZATION 
Once, Sage Agastya narrated the following tale to King Bhadrashva--- One day, 
Narada went to Lord Vishnu and asked about the means by which a devotee 
could realize him. Lord Vishnu replied--Those who worship me by chanting the 
mantras of either 'Purushasukta' or 'Vaidik Samhita' can certainly realize me. 
Those who perform oblation according to the rituals of 'Pancharatra' can also 
have my divine glimpse. But, the rituals of Pancharatra yagya can be 
performed only by the Brahmins. All the rest of the castes can realize me by 
devotion, chanting my name and making pilgrimage to holy places. "Sage 
Agastya while giving discourse to king Bhadrashwa also predicted that sinners 
would outnumber the virtuous ones in Kali Yuga and said--"People would 
abandon their respective 'dharmas' and the caste system would become 
extinct."  
LORD VISHNU--THE ALMIGHTY GOD  

693 
 



Once, Sage Agastya had organised a grand yagya in which he had invited all 
the deities and sages. Lord Vishnu, Lord Brahma and Lord Shiva also went 
there. Agastya was puzzled as to who was the most superior among all three 
of them. He asked Lord Shiva in this regard. Lord Shiva replied--One who is 
worshipped by performing oblation- One who is the source of this universe 
and into whom it ultimately merges; is none other than Lord Janardhan. So he 
should be worshipped first of all. 
He is the only one who expresses himself in three forms--Brahma, Vishnu, 
Mahesh. Rajas guna is predominant in Lord Brahma along with some 
quantities of Satva guna and Tamoguna.Lord Brahma has manifested from the 
naval of Lord Vishnu. Tamas guna is the dominant quality in me (Rudra) with 
little bit of satva and rajo gunas. Narayan is the embodiment of pure satva 
guna. 
In Satya Yuga, He is worshipped by the means of meditation. During Treta 
Yuga, He is worshipped by the means of oblation. During Dwapar Yuga, He is 
pleased by nothing but the rituals of Pancharatra. During Kali Yuga, people will 
worship Him by various means. Lord Shiva's revelations had completely 
satisfied Sage Agastya. 
SAGE GAUTAM CURSES THE BRAHMINS  
There were many sages present at the yagya organised by Agastya. Some of 
them asked Lord Shiva as to why he had created some scriptures which 
appeared so confusing to human beings. 
Lord Shiva revealed to them that he had done so to protect the Brahmins from 
the curse of Sage Gautam. Then he narrated the incident as it had happened --
- During ancient times, Sage Gautam did an austere penance in Dandakaranya 
forest. Lord Brahma became pleased and gave him some divine seeds capable 
of producing eternal crops. 
Gautam then went to SaptaSring mountain and made his hermitage there. He 
sowed the seeds and became pleasantly surprised when he saw rice grains 
sprouting up within few moments. He lived there happily with his disciples. In 

694 
 



course of time, the whole country was struck by famine except the place 
where Gautam had his hermitage. 
One day, few sages arrived at Gautam's hermitage. Gautam treated them with 
all the respect. 
These sages enjoyed the hospitality of Gautam and stayed at his hermitage till 
the famine phase was over. Then they decided to go back to their respective 
native places. When they sought Gautam's permission, he requested him to 
stay for few more days. The sages then decided to use deceitful means for 
taking Gautam's permission. They created a superficial cow with the help of 
their illusionary powers and left it near the hermitage of Gautam. 
Gautam was very pleased to see that cow. He eulogised it by sprinkling water 
on it. Hardly had he finished his act than the cow died. All those wicked sages 
arrived there and cursed Gautam for killing an innocent cow. They told him 
that they could never live along with a person who had killed a cow. Gautam 
then requested those impostors to tell about the means by which he could 
become absolved from the heinous sin he had committed. The sages told him 
that the cow would become alive once Ganga water was sprinkled on its body. 
Gautam once again did a tremendous penance to please Lord Shiva. When 
Lord Shiva appeared, he requested him to give a lock of his hair. Lord Shiva 
agreed to give a lock of his hair to Gautam. Gautam then went to the spot 
where the cow's body was lying. He sprinkled some water emanating from the 
hair. The illusionary cow disappeared within a moment and in its place was 
created a river. Right then, the Sapta Rishis arrived there and blessed Gautam. 
Meanwhile, Gautam realized that a wicked prank had been played on him by 
those wicked sages. He cursed those wicked sages that they would become 
bereft of the knowledge of Vedas and also that they would no longer be 
entitled to perform the Vedic rituals. 
The Sapta Rishis requested Gautam to have mercy on those unfortunate 
Brahmins. Gautam then declared that his curse will come true only in Kali 
Yuga and those Brahmins will not be affected by his curse in all the remaining 

695 
 



three yugas. The Sapta Rishis came to me and informed me about whatever 
had happened to those unfortunate Brahmins. I created 'Shiva Sanhita' from 
my breath which is similar to Vedas as far as the importance of rituals are 
concerned. I did this for the benediction of the Brahmins. I know that 
Brahmins would fall from grace during Kali Yuga. 
People would give little respect to the Vedas and create their own scriptures. 
Confusion would be prevalent and people would discover false religions. 
PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA  
Once, Lord Shiva while describing about the incident when he had a divine 
glimpse of Lord Narayan, told Sage Agastya -- 'Purusha' is none other than 
Lord Narayan himself and Prakriti is the medium through which he manifests 
his powers. I have been fortunate to have a divine glimpse of this Purusha. 
Lord Brahma after having created me, instructed me to create. But, I did not 
know how to create. So, I decided to do penance and went into the ocean. In 
the ocean, I saw an entity who was no more than the size of a thumb. He was 
Purusha himself and I immediately recognized him. I started meditating on the 
form of that almighty--Purusha.  
Suddenly, eleven more entities emerged before me. They were all very radiant 
and the water had become hot on account of the heat emanating from their 
bodies. I asked them as to who they were but they did not give any reply and 
went out of my sight. The next moment, I saw an extremely handsome man. I 
asked him about his identity and also about the eleven entities whom I had 
seen few moments ago. Those entities were the eleven Adityas and had gone 
to help Lord Brahma in the process of creation.  
Then he said--I am Narayana--the omnipresent lord. I am blessing you with 
'divine vision' so that you can see my divine appearance.' When I fixed my 
glance at Narayana I was amazed to see the same thumb-sized Narayana 
standing before me. But, now He was no longer having the size of a thumb. On 
the contrary he had expanded his body to such an extent that He appeared 
like a giant. I also saw Lord Brahma sitting on a lotus flower emanating from 

696 
 



his navel. I eulogized Him with complete devotion. He blessed me and said--
'You are eternal and nothing is beyond your knowledge. You will be 
worshipped by the deities. I shall take twelve incarnations in the coming eras 
and shall worship you in each of my incarnation.' Having said this, Lord 
Narayana disappeared. This was how I saw the divine form of the 'Purusha'--
Lord Narayana. 
BHUWAN-KOSH AND THE ISLANDS  
All the sages listened with rapt attention to the description Lord Shiva made 
of the Almighty Narayan. But, they had few more queries in store, so they 
asked Lord Shiva-- "O Lord of Uma! Please tell us about the expanse of the 
Earth- the situation of mountains and the prominent islands." Lord Shiva 
replied--"Bhuloka is situated on the surface of the Earth, while the earth itself 
is based on Almighty's chest. With the desire of creating the three basic 
gunas---Sat, raj and Tama, the Almighty Narayan created water first of all and 
went into 'yoganidra'. Then a lotus flower manifested from His navel on which 
was seated Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma then created his manasputras--Sanak, 
Sanandan, Sanatan and Sanatkumar all of whom were enlightened souls. 
Then Lord Brahma created sages like Daksha etc. Daksha's daughter Shatarupa 
was married to Manu from whom she had two sons--Priyavrata and Uttanpad. 
Priyavrat had ten sons-- Aghnighna, Agnibahu, Medh, Medhatithi, Dhruva, 
Jyotishman, Dyutiman, Havya, Vayushman and Savan. He had divided the 
earth into seven islands and presented them to each of his seven sons. 
Aghnighna became the king of Jambudweepa whereas Medhatithi, 
Jyotishman, Dyutiman, Havya, Vayushman and Savan became the rulers of 
Shakadweepa, Kraunch dweepa, Shalmali dweepa, Gomed dweepa, Plaksh 
dweepa, and Pushkar dweepa.”  
“Savan had two sons--Dhat and Mahaveeti, who were the rulers of 'Dhatki' 
and 'Kaumud provinces respectively. Similarly Dyutiman had three sons--Kush, 
Vaidyut and Jeemutvahan. 

697 
 



Jyotishman had seven sons--Kushal, Manugavya, Peevar, Andhra, Andhakarak, 
Muni and Dundubhi. Kush had seven sons--Udbhid, Venuman, Rathapal, 
Manu, Dhriti, Prabhakar and Papil.”  
“Medhatithi too had seven sons--Nabhi, Shantmaya, Shishir, Mukhodam, 
Nandshiva, Kshemak and Dhruva. Nabhi's wife was Merudevi, who had given 
birth to Rishabh. Rishabh was the father of Bharata upon whom the area lying 
south of Himalaya mountain is named.”  
“Sumati was the son of Bharata. Bharata, after appointing Sumati as his 
successor went into the forest to do penance. The names of some prominent 
kings coming from the lineage of Sumati were Tej, Satsut, Indradyumna, 
Parmeshthi, Pratiharta, Nikhat, Unmeta, Abhav-Udgata, Prastota, Vibhu, 
Prithu, Anant, Gaya, Naya, Virat, Mahavirya and Sudhiman.”  
“Sudhiman had one hundred sons. This way the population continued to 
grow. The four yugas-- Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga and Kali Yuga 
occur in a cyclic order. Each of the latter follows the former. A manvantar 
comprises of  71 Chaturyugas." 
JAMBUDWEEPA  
Dwelling upon the prominent islands, Lord Shiva told the assembled sages---
"Jambudweepa is spread in the area of one lakh yojan and it consists of 
numerous Janapadads. It is inhabited by 'siddhas' and 'charanas' and is 
blessed with incomparable natural beauty." 'A total number of nine 'Varshas' 
lie within the territory of Jambudweepa which itself is surrounded by various 
oceans on all sides. Towards its east and west lie salt water oceans. Some 
prominent mountains of Jambudweepa are the Himalaya, the Sumeru, the 
Hemakut and the Nishadh. Territory situated towards east of Sumeru 
mountain is inhabited by the fair complexioned Brahmins. Towards its south 
live Vaishyas. Shudras live towards the south of Sumeru and the area lying 
towards its north is inhabited by Kshatriyas." SHAK DWEEPA Its area is 
approximately twice as compared to Jambudweepa. It is inhabited by virtuous 
people who are prosperous and who enjoy a long life. They are free from the 

698 
 



tortures of old age. This island is covered by oceans on its two sides--Salt 
water ocean on one side and 'Ksheer Sagar' (Ocean of Milk) on the other. The 
mountain ranges lying in the northern part of this island is known as 
Udayachal while 'Chandragiri is situated in the western part. There are some 
other mountain ranges like Rajatgiri, Ambikey, etc situated on this island. 
Altogether these mountain ranges total seven in number and are known as 
'Kula-Parvatas'. Some primonent rivers flowing through this island are 
Sukumari, Kumari, Nanda, Venika, Dhenu, Ikshumati and Gabhasti. 
There is a large tree named Shak in the central part of this island. This is how 
this island derived its name. 
KUSHA DWEEPA  
This island is twice the area of Shak dweepa. There are seven prominent 
mountain ranges in this island which are known as 'Kula Parvatas'--- Kumud, 
Unnat, Drona, Kank, Isha, Mahish and Mandar. There are seven prominent 
rivers flowing through the various parts of this island-- Pratoya, Shiva, Chitra, 
Chandra, Vidyullta, Varna and Mahati. This island has got its name from Kusha 
grass which are found in abundance in its central part. 
KRAUNCHA DWEEPA 
It is twice the area of Kusha dweepa. It has seven prominent mountain ranges-
-Kraunch, Pavan, Devavrit, Devishtha, Devanand, Govind and Pundareek. 
There are also six prominent rivers flowing in this island--Gauri, Kumudwati, 
Ratri, Manojava, Khyati and Pundarika. Kraunch dweepa is surrounded by an 
ocean of charified butter (ghee) on all its sides. 
SHALMALI DWEEPA  
"It is double the area of Kraunch dweepa and covers the 'clarified-butter' 
ocean from all sides. 
There are seven prominent mountains as well as seven rivers in this island." 
This way Lord Shiva disappeared after having finished the narration of all the 
prominent islands. 

699 
 



TRISHAKTI  
Describing the reason behind the manifestation of 'Trishakti' (Three 
Goddesses manifesting from the bodies of Brahma Vishnu and Shiva), Lord 
Varaha A told Prithvi--- There lived a mighty demon named 'Andhak' who used 
to torment the deities. After being driven out of the heaven all the deities 
sought Lord Brahma's help. Lord Brahma took them to Lord Shiva and 
requested him to find some solution to the miseries of the deities. Lord 
Brahma then meditated on the form of Vishnu who appeared instantly. 
The powers emanating from the eyes of all the three deities got combined and 
resulted into the manifestation of Goddess Parmeshwari. On the request of 
the deities, Goddess Parmeshwari created three more Goddesses from her 
body- Brahmi, Vishnupriya and Rudrani. Goddess Brahmi was of fair 
complexion while Vishnupriya's complexion was wheatish. Goddess Rudrani 
appeared extremely ferocious in her dark complexion. 
Lord Brahma advised Goddess Brahmi to do penance at Shwetgiri mountain. 
Similarly, Vishnupriya went to Mandarachal mountain to do her penance 
while Lord Shiva advised Goddess Rudrani to go to Nilgiri mountain. While 
Vishnupriya was doing her penance at Mandarachal mountain, crores of 
Goddesses manifested from her body prominent among whom were 
Vidyutprabha, Chandrakanti, Suryakanti, Gambhira, Vijaya, Jaya, Jayanti, 
Aparajita, etc. All these Goddesses acted as the escorts of Goddess 
Vishnupriya who is also called Vaishnavi. 
One day, sage Narada visited Goddess Vaishnavi and was dumbstruck by her 
divine beauty. He had never seen such a beautiful woman in his life. On his 
return journey, Narada met Mahishasur- the mighty demon, who had been 
blessed by Brahma. Mahishasur had conquered all the three worlds. Narada 
praised the glory of Mahishasur but went on to add that his majesty was 
incomplete untill he married Vaishnavi. 
Narada said- "I have never seen such a beautiful woman in my life. She is 
worshipped by all the sages, gandharvas, deities as well as other celestial 

700 
 



beings. Although you are worthy of becoming her husband yet the fact is that 
you can not have her as your wife untill you have conquered the deities and 
the Gandharvas." After sowing a seed of lust in Mahishasur's mind, Narada 
went away. Mahishasur vowed to marry Vaishnavi at any cost. Lord Varaha 
continued with the tale and said- "After Narada went away, Mahishasur 
summoned his ministers- Praghas, Vighas, Shanku-karna, Vibhavasu, 
Vidyunmali, Sumali, Parjanya and Krura. When all the ministers arrived, he 
requested them to find out means so that he could marry Vaishnavi. 
Praghas- one of the ministers, was very intelligent. He warned Mahishasur 
against going ahead with his evil designs and said- 'This illegal abduction could 
become the cause for your destruction. 'Vighas corroborated the statements 
of Praghas. Finally everyone agreed that it would be better if Vaishnavi was 
persuaded to accept Mahishasur as her husband instead of forcefully 
abducting her. 
"So all of them, finally came upon two conclusions- first was to send a 
messenger to persuade Vaishnavi into marrying Mahishasur and the second 
was to defeat the deities in a battle. A demon named Vidutprabha was sent to 
meet Goddess Vaishnavi. Mahishasur then launched a fierce attack on the 
deities and defeated them. The deities were forced to flee the battlefield and 
seek refuge in Brahma loka.”  
“Meanwhile, Vidutprabha had already reached Mandarachal mountain. 
Without showing any rspect to Goddess Vaishnavi, he tried to impress her by 
narrating the amazing tale of Mahishasur's birth- 'During ancient times, there 
lived a sage named Suparshva.  
Once he was doing penance and an ogress named Mahishmati alongwith her 
companions, arrived at his hermitage. Mahishmati was very much impressed 
by the grandeur of his hermitage and decided to occupy it. She changed her 
appearance and became a buffalo. She then started tormenting Suparshva, 
who was initially terrified but finally came to know about her real identity. 
Suparshva cursed her- 'You deserve to remain as a buffalo for the rest of your 
life.' "Now Mahishmati became extremely terrified and begged for being 

701 
 



pardoned. Finally, Suparshva took pity on her and said- 'You will get liberated 
from my curse only after you give birth to a calf.' Thus Mahishmati started 
wandering all over the places in the form of a buffalo. 
Once, while wandering, she reached the bank of river Narmada, where sage 
Sindhudweep was doing his penance. A significant incident had taken place 
just few minutes before her arrivalSage Sindhudweep, being unable to control 
himself, had ejaculated sperms after infatuated by a beautiful ogress taking 
bath in river Narmada, which was flowing nearby. The sperms fell on a rock 
and was eventually washed off by the swift currents of Narmada.”  
“As Mahishmati was thirsty, she drank water from river Narmada. While 
quenching her thirst, she also consumed the sperms as the result of which she 
became pregnant. In course of time, she gave birth to Mahishasur, who grew 
up to be a mighty demon king. The same Mahishasur wants to marry you." 
After finishing his story, Vidutprabha waited for Vaishnavi's response. 
Goddess Vaishnavi burst into a loud laughter and all the the three worlds 
became visible to the messenger, through her opened mouth. Vidutprabha 
was scarred to the hilt as he realized that the woman was extraordinary and 
divine. 
Jaya-a dwarpalika of Vaishnavi, told him- 'Our Goddess has taken a vow of 
celibacy, hence your master's wish will remain unfulfilled.' At last, 
Vidutprabha went back empty handed. In the meantime, Narada arrived there 
and informed Goddess Vaishnavi about the deities's defeat at the hands of 
Mahishasur and requested her to kill the demon. Goddess Vaishnavi ordered 
her escorts to get prepared for the battle. She then proceeded with a huge 
army to fight against the demons. In the ensuing battle, Mahishasur's army 
was severely humiliated. Most of the demons were killed and the survivors 
fled from the battlefield. A demon named Virupaksha informed Mahishasur of 
the death and destruction caused by Goddess Vaishnavi.Mahishasur was 
infuriated and came forward to fight the Goddess. Goddess Vaishnavi was 
aware of his might, so she manifested her divine form in all her glory. Now she 
possessed ten arms and held lethal weapons like a sword, a bow, a shield, a 

702 
 



mace, a trident, a chakra, etc. in each of them. She then remembered Lord 
Shiva, who appeared within a moment. Goddess Vaishnavi requested him to 
be witness to the fierce battle, which was going to take place. 
A fierce battle commenced, which lasted for ten thousand divine years. 
Mahishasur ran helter and skelter, changing his disguise frequently, in order 
to protect his life but Goddess Vaishnavi chased him wherever he went. 
Ultimately she killed him at 'Shata- Sring' mountain by severing his head. All 
the deities heaved a sigh of relief and praised the glory of Goddess Vaishnavi. 
Similarly, Goddess Rudrani, who had manifested from Lord Shiva and had 
gone to Nilgiri mountain to do her penance had killed a mighty demon named 
'Ruru'. Ruru was a very powerful demon king. He ruled over Ratnapuri, which 
was situated in the middle of the ocean. He had become invincible on account 
of a boon received from Lord Brahma. After being defeated by him, all the 
deities went to seek the help of Goddess Rudrani. Goddess Rudrani, who is 
also known as 'Chamunda' finally killed Ruru, the dreaded demon." Having 
completed the tale, Lord Varaha blessed Prithvi and went back to his abode. 
Home   
  

703 
 



8. AGNI PURANA  
Preliminaries  
In the forest that is known as Naimisharanya, Shounaka and the other Rishis 
(sages) were performing a yajna (sacrifice) dedicated to the Lord Vishnu. Suta 
had also come there, on his way to a pilgrimage. 
The sages told Suta, "We have welcomed you. Now describe to us that which 
makes men allknowing. 
Describe to us that which is the most sacred in the whole world". 
Suta replied, "Vishnu is the essence of everything. I went to a hermitage 
named Badrika with Shuka, Paila and other sages and met Vyadeva there. 
Vyasadeva described to me that which he had learnt from the great sage 
Vashishtha, Vashishtha having learnt it from the God Agni himself. The Agni 
Purana is sacred because it tells us about the essence of the Brahman (the 
divine essence). I learnt all this from Vyasadeva and I will now tell you all that I 
have learnt."  
AVATARAS 
Do you know what an avatara is? An avatara is an incarnation and means that 
a God adopts a human form to be born on earth. Why do Gods do this? The 
purpose is to destroy evil on earth and establish righteousness. Vishnu is 
regarded as the preserver of the universe and it is therefore Vishnu's 
incarnations that one encounters most often. Vishnu has already had nine 
such incarnations and the tenth and final incarnation is due in the future. 
These ten incarnations of Vishnu are as follows. 
(1) Matsya avatara- fish incarnation 
(2) Kurma avatara- turtle incarnation 
(3) Varaha avataraboar incarnation 
(4) Narasimha avatara- half-man lion incarnation 
(5) Vamana avatara- dwarf incarnation 

704 
 



(6) Parashurama 
(7) Rama 
(8) Krishna 
(9) Buddha 
(10) Kalki-this is the incarnation that is yet to come. 
The Agni Purana now describes these ten incarnations. 
The Fish Agni told Vashishtha the story of the fish incarnation. 
Many years ago, the whole world was destroyed. The destruction in fact 
extended to all the three lokas (worlds) of bhuloka, bhuvarloka and svarloka. 
Bhuloka is the earth, svarloka or svarga is heaven and bhuvarloka is a region 
between the earth and heaven. All three worlds were flooded with water. 
Vaivasvata Manu was the son of the sun-God. He had spent ten thousand 
years in prayers and tapasya (meditation) in the hermitage Badrika. This 
hermitage was on the banks of the river Kritamala. 
Once Manu came to the river to perform his ablutions. He immersed his hands 
in the water to get some water for his ablutions. When he raised them, he 
found that there was a small fish swimming in the water in the cup of his 
hands. 
Manu was about to throw the fish back into the water when the fish said, 
"Don't throw me back. I am scared of alligators and crocodiles and big fishes. 
Save me." Manu found an earthen pot in which he could keep the fish. But 
soon the fish became too big for the pot and Manu had to find a larger vessel 
in which the fish might be kept. But the fish became too big for this vessel as 
well and Manu had to transfer the fish to a take. But the fish grew and grew 
and became too large for the lake. So Manu transferred the fish to the ocean. 
In the ocean, the fish grew until it became gigantic. 
By now, Manu's wonder knew no bounds. He said, "Who are you? You must 
be the Lord Vishnu, I bow down before you. Tell me, why are you tantalising 
me in the form of a fish?" The fish replied, "I have to punish the evil and 

705 
 



protect the good. Seven days from now, the ocean will flood the entire world 
and all beings will be destroyed. But since you have saved me, I will save you. 
When the world is flooded, a boat will arrive here. Take the saptarshis (seven 
sages) with that boat. Don't forget to take the seeds of foodgrains with you. I 
will arrive and you will then fasten the boat to my horn with a huge snake." 
Saying this, the fish disappeared. 
Everything happened as the fish had promised it would. The ocean became 
turbulent and Manu climbed into the boat. He tied the boat to the huge horn 
that the fish had. He prayed to the fish and the fish related the Matsya Purana 
to him. Eventually, when the water receded, the boat was anchored to the 
topmost peak of the Himalayas. And living beings were created once again. 
A danava (demon) named Hayagriva had stolen the sacred texts of the Vedas 
and the knowledge of the Brahman. In his form of a fish, Vishnu also killed 
Hayagriva and recovered the Vedas. 
The Turtle Many years ago there was a war between the devas (Gods) and the 
daityas (demons) and the Gods lost this war. They prayed to Vishnu to rescue 
them from the oppression of the demons. Vishnu told Brahma and the other 
Gods that they should have a temporary truce with the demons. The two sides 
should get together to churn the ocean. Vishnu would ensure that the devas 
benefited more from this churning of the ocean than the daityas did. 
The truce was agreed upon and the two sides got ready to churn the ocean. 
The mountain Mandara was used as a churning rod and great sake Vasuki as 
the rope for churning. The devas grasped Vasuki's tail and the daityas grasped 
Vasuki's head. But as the churning began, the mountain Mandara which had 
no base, started to get immersed in the ocean. What was to be done? Lord 
Vishnu came to the rescue. He adopted the form of a turtle and the peak was 
balanced on the turtle's back. 
As the churning continued, terrible poison named kalkuta emerged from the 
depths of the ocean and was swallowed by Shiva. Shiva's throat became blue 
from this poison and he is therefore known as Nilakantha, blue of throat. The 

706 
 



Goddess Varunai, the Goddess of wine (sura), came out next. The Gods readily 
accepted her and thus they came to be known as suras. But the demons 
rejected Varunai and were therefore known as asuras. She was followed by 
the Parijata tree, a beautiful tree that came to occupy the pride of place in 
Indra's garden. A jewel named koustubha emerged and was accepted by 
Vishnu as his adornment. Three wonderful animals came out next - the cow 
Kapila, the horse Ucchaishrava and the elephant Airavata. They were followed 
by the apsaras, beautiful women who became the dancers of heaven. They 
were known as apsaras because they emerged from ap (water). The Goddess 
Lakshmi or Sri came out next and was united with Vishnu. 
Finally, Dhanvantari emerged with a pot of amrita (the life - giving drink) in his 
hands. 
Dhanvantari was the originator of medicine (ayurveda). The daityas led by 
Jambha gave half of the amrita to the devas and departed with the remaining 
half. 
But Vishnu quickly adopted the form of a beautiful woman. So beautiful was 
the woman that the demons were charmed. "Pretty lady," they said. " Take 
the amrita and serve it to us. Marry us." Vishnu accepted the amrita, but he 
had no intention of giving it to the demons. He served it to the Gods instead. 
There was only one demon who was somewhat clever. His name was Rahu. He 
adopted the form of Chandra, the moon-God, and succeeded in drinking some 
of the amrita. The sun-God and the moon-God noticed what was happening 
and reported it to Vishnu. Vishnu thereupon cut off Rahu's head with a sword. 
But Rahu had drunk the amrita, so he could not die. He prayed to Vishnu and 
Vishnu granted him a boon. The boon was that occasionally Rahu would be 
permitted to swallow up the sun and the complained about him. You can see 
this happening at the time of the solar and the lunar eclipses. People who give 
alms during such eclipses are blessed. 

707 
 



The Gods obtained the amrita and the demons did not. Thus, the Gods 
became more powerful than the demons. They defeated the demons and 
regained heaven. 
The Boar Vishnu's next incarnation was in the form of a boar. 
The sage Kashyapa and his wife Diti had a son named Hiranyaksha. He became 
the king of the asuras. Hiranyaksha's meditation pleased Brahma and Brahma 
granted him the boon that he would be invincible in battle. Thus armed. 
Hiranyaksha went out to fight with the devas. He comprehensively defeated 
the Gods and conquered heaven. He also defeated Varuna, the God of the 
ocean. Thus, Hiranyaksha became the king of the heaven, the earth and the 
underworld. 
But the asura was not particularly fond of the earth. He himself had begun to 
live in Varuna's palace under the ocean. So he hurled the earth into the 
depths of the ocean. 
The Gods went to Vishnu and prayed that something might be done about 
Hiranyaksha. They wished to be restored to heaven and they wished that the 
earth might be brought back from the depths of the ocean. In response to 
these prayers, Vishnu adopted the form of a boar and entered the ocean. Who 
should he meet there but Hiranyaksha himself? Hiranyaksha of course did not 
know that this boar was none other than Vishnu. He thought that it was an 
ordinary boar and attacked it. The two fought for many years. But finally, 
Hiranyaksha was gored to death by the boar's tusks. The boar raised the earth 
up once again with its tusks. 
Vishnu thus saved the Gods and the principles of righteousness or dharma. 
Man -Lion Hiranyaksha had a brother named Hiranyakashipu. Hiranyakashipu 
was furious to learn that his brother had been killed and the resolved to kill 
Vishnu. But this could not be done unless h e himself became powerful land 
invincible. Hiranyakashipu, therefore, began to pray to Brahma through 
difficult meditation. Brahma was pleased at these prayers and offered to grant 
a boon."I want to be invincible," said Hiranyakashipu. "Please grant me the 

708 
 



boon that I may not be killed by night or day; that I may not be killed by man 
or beast; and that I may not be killed in the sky, the water or the earth." 
Brahma granted the desired boon. And Hiranyakashipu was happy. He 
thought that he had taken care of all possible eventualities. And since he had 
become so powerful, he conquered all the three worlds and kicked the Gods 
out to heaven. 
Hiranyakashipu had a son named Prahlada. You no doubt remember that 
Hiranyakashipu had resolved to kill Vishnu. But strangely enough, Prahlada 
became devoted to Vishnu. 
Hiranyakashipu tried to persuade his son. That did not work. He tried to kill his 
son. That too did not work since each time, Vishnu intervened to save 
Prahlada. 
Meanwhile, the Gods had been driven off from heaven. They had also been 
deprived of their shares in yajanas by Hiranyakashipu. These shares now went 
only to the asura king. In desperation, they went and prayed to Vishnu and 
Vishnu promised them that he would find a solution. 
One day, Hiranyakashipu called Prahlada to him. "How is it that you escaped 
each time I tried to kill you?" he asked. 
"Because Vishnu saved me," replied Prahlada. "Vishnu is everywhere.”  
“What do you mean everywhere?" retorted Hiranyakashipu. He pointed to a 
crystal pillar inside the palace and asked, "Is Vishnu inside this pillar as well?”  
“Yes," replied Prahlada. 
"Very well then. I am going to kick the pillar," said Hiranyakashipu. 
When Hiranyakashipu kicked the pillar, it broke into two. And from inside the 
pillar, Vishnu emerged in his form of half-man and half-lion. He caught hold of 
Hiranyakashipu and placed the demon across his thighs. And with his claws, he 
tore apart the demon's chest and so killed him. 
Brahma's boon had been that Hiranyakashipu would not be killed by man or 
beast. But then narasimha was neither man nor beast it was half-man and 

709 
 



half-beast. The boon had said that the asura would not be killed in the sky, the 
water or the earth. But Hiranyakashipu was killed on Vishnu's thighs, which 
were not the sky, the water or the earth. And finally, the noon had promised 
that Hiranyakashipu would not be killed by night or day. Since the incident 
took place in the evening, it was not night or day. 
After Hiranyakashipu died, the Gods were restored to their rightful places. 
Vishnu's made Prahlada the king of the asuras. 
The DwarfPrahlada's grandson was Bali and Bali became very powerful. When 
he was the king of the asuras, there was a war between the devas and the 
asuras. The Gods were defeated and were driven off from svarga. As always, 
the Gods fled to Vishnu and began to pray to him to save them. Vishnu 
assured the Gods that he would do something about Bali. 
Accordingly, Vishnu was born as the son of Aditi and Kashyapa. The son was a 
dwarf. 
King Bali had arranged for a huge sacrifice and had announced that, on the 
occasion of the sacrifice, he would not refuse anyone a boon. The dwarf 
arrived at this sacrifice and began to recite the Veda's. Bali was so pleased at 
this that he offered the dwarf a bon. Bali's guru (teacher) was Shukracharya 
and Shukracharya thought that there was something fishy about the way the 
dwarf had arrived. So he tried to restrain Bali. 
"No," said Bali. "I have offered a boon and I shall stick to my word." What 
boon do you desire? I will give whatever you want." Before a boon was 
actually granted, a small rite had to be performed with holy water. 
Shukracharya was still trying to do his best to prevent the boon from being 
given. So he entered the vessel in which the holy water was kept to seal the 
mouth of the vessel and prevent the water from being taken out. To get at the 
holy water, the vessel was pierced with a straw. This straw also pierced one of 
Shukracharya's eyes. Ever since that day, the preceptor of the demons has 
been one eyed. 

710 
 



"Give me as much of land as may be covered in three of my steps," said the 
dwarf. "I need this as Dakshaina (fee) for my guru." Bali agreed. But the dwarf 
adopted a gigantic form. With one step he covered bhuloka. With another 
step he covered bhuvarloka. And with the last step he covered svarloka. The 
three worlds were thus lost to Bali and Vishnu returned them to Indra. Bali 
had no option but to go down to the underworld (patala). But so pleased was 
Vishnu at Bali's generosity that he granted the asura the boon that he would 
bear the title of Indra in the future. 
Parashurama The kshatriyas were the second of the four classes. It was their 
job to wear arms and protect the world. And rule. The Brahmanas were the 
first of the four classes. It was their job to pray, study the sacred texts and 
perform religious rites. But the kshatriyas became very insolent and began to 
oppress the world and the Brahmanas. Vishnu was then born as the son of the 
sage Jamadagni and his wife Renuka. Since this was the line of the sage 
Bhrigu, Parashurama was also called Bhargava. Parashurama's mission was to 
protect the Brahmanas and teach a lesson to the kshatriyas. 
There was a king named Kartavirya who had received all sorts of boons from 
the sage Dattatreya. Thanks to these boons, Kartavirya had a thousand arms 
and conquered and ruled over the entire world. One day, Kartavirya went on a 
hunt to the forest. He was very tired after the hunt and was invited by the 
sage Jamadagni had a Kamadhenu cow. This meant that the cow produced 
whatever its owner desired. Jamadagni used the Kamadhenu to treat 
Kartavirya and all his soldiers to a sumptuous feast. 
Kartavirya was so enamoured of the Kamadhenu that he asked the sage to 
give it to him. But Jamadagni refused. Kartavirya then abducted the cow by 
force and a war started between Kartavirya and Parashurama. In this war, 
Parashurama cut off Kartavirya's head with his axe (parashu) and brought the 
Kamadhenu back to the hermitage. 
After some time, Parashurama was away when Kartavirya's sons arrived at the 
ashrama and killed Jamadagni. On the death of his father, Parashurama's 
anger was aroused. He killed all the kshatriyas in the world twenty-one times. 

711 
 



On the plains of Kurukshetra, he built five wells which were filled with the 
blood of kshatriyas. Eventually, Parashurama handed over the world to 
Kashyapa and went and lived on Mount Mahendra. 
Rama Brahma came out of Vishnu's navel. Brahma's son was Marichi's son 
Kashyapa, Kashyapa's son Surya, Surya's son Vaivasvata Manu, Manu's son 
Ikshvaku, Ikskhvakku's son Kakutstha, Kakutstha's son Raghu, Raghu's son Aja, 
Aja's son Dasharatha, Dasharatha's sons were Rama, Bharataa, Lakshmana 
and Shatrughna. Since Rama was descended from Kakutstha and Raghu, he 
was also called Kakutstha and Raghava. Since his father's name was 
Dasharatha, he was also called Dasharathi. Rama's story belongs to the solar 
line (surya vansha), since one of his ancestors was Surya. 
Vishnu himself wished to destroy Ravana and the other Rakshasas (demons). 
He therefore divided himself into four parts and was born as Ramas, Bharataa, 
Lakshmana and Shatrughna. 
Rama was Koushalya's son, Bharataa Kaikeyi's. Lakshmana and Shartrughna 
were the sons of Sumitra. 
The sage Vishvamitra came to Dasharatha and pleaded for Rama's help in 
defeating the Rakshasas who were disturbing his yajanas. Rama killed these 
demons and Vishvamitra was so pleased that he taught Rama the use of all 
divine weapons. Rama broke a bow of Shiva's that had been in the possession 
of the king of Mithila, Janaka. This was the task that had been appointed for 
marrying Sita, Janaka's daughter. Rama married Sita, Lakshmana married 
urmila, Bharataa married Mandavi and Shatrughna married Shrutakirti. On the 
way back to Ayodhya, Rama also beat Parashurama in a duel. Dasharatha 
resolved that Rama should be made yuvaraja, that is, the heir apparent to the 
kingdom. 
But Kaikeyi had a servant named Manthara who plotted otherwise. When he 
was young, Rama had pulled at Manthara's feet and ever since that day, 
Manthara had not been kindly towards Rama. She reminded Kaikeyi of the 
two; boons that had been promised to her by King Dasharatha. Years ago, the 

712 
 



Gods had been fighting with the demon Shambara and had asked Dasharatha 
for his help. In fighting with Shambara, Dasharatha had been injured. He had 
been nursed back to health by Kaikeyi. Dasharatha had promised two boons 
to Kaikeyi as a reward and Manthara's suggestion was that Kaikeyi should now 
ask for these two boons. By the first boon Rama would be banished to the 
forest for fourteen years and by the second boon Bharataa would become 
yuvaraja. 
Kaikeyi listened to Manthara. At Manthara's instance, she asked for these two 
boons. Dasharatha was very angry, but Rama insisted that he would indeed go 
to the forest for fourteen years. 
Rama, Lakshmana and Sita first went to the banks of the river Tamasa. From 
there they went to the kingdom of Guha, the king of the hunters (nishadas). 
They crossed the river Jahnavi and arrived in Prayaga, where the sage 
Bharadvaja had his hermitage. Their final destination was the mountain range 
of Chitrakuta, on the banks of the river Mandakini. 
Meanwhile, back home in Ayodhaya, King Dasharatha who could not bear to 
be parted from Rama, died. Bharataa and Shatrughna had gone on a visit to 
their uncle's house and were recalled. But Bharataa refused to be king. He 
went to the forest to try and persuade Rama to return, but Rama insisted that 
he would not return before the fourteen years were over. So Bharataa 
brought back Rama's sandals. He placed these sandals on the throne as a 
token of Rama's kingship. And he began to rule the kingdom in Rama's name 
from Nandigram, rather than from Ayodhya. 
Rama, Lakshmana and Sita then went to the forest that is known as the 
Dandaka forest, Dandakaranya. This forest was on the banks of the river 
Godavari and there was a beautiful lgrove inside the forest known as 
Panchavati. They built a hut there and resolved to live there. 
There was a Rakshasa woman named Shurpanakha. She happened to come to 
the place where Rama Lakshmana and Sita had built their hut. Shurpanakha 

713 
 



liked Rama so much that she wanted to marry Rama and eat up Lakshmana 
and Sita. But Lakshmana cut off Shurpanakha's nose and ears with his sword. 
Shurpanakha fled to brother Khara and demanded revenge. Khara and 
fourteen thousand other demons (Rakshasas) attacked Rama, but they were 
all killed by Rama. Shurpanakha then went to her other brother Ravana, the 
king of Lanka. 
Ravana asked the rakshasa Maricha to adopt the form of a golden deer and 
roam around in front of Rama's hut. Sita was so charmed by the deer that she 
asked Rama to capture it for her. Rama was long in returning and Lakshmana 
went to look for him. Taking advantage of Rama and Lakshmana's absence, 
Ravana kidnapped Sita. Jatayu, the king of the birds, did try to stop Ravana, 
but he met his death at Ravana's hands. 
Rama and Lakshmana were greatly distressed to find Sita missing and they 
looked for her everywhere. Rama made friends with the monkey Sugriva. He 
killed Sugriva's brother Bali and made Sugriva the king of monkeys. The 
monkeys were sent off in all the four directions to for Sita. 
The monkeys who had gone towards the south learnt that Sita was in Lanka, 
across the ocean. 
One of these monkeys was Hanuman. Hanuman leapt over the ocean and 
arrived in Lanka. He discovered the lonesome Sita in a grove of ashoka trees, 
the ashokavana. Hanuman introduced himself and assured Sita that he would 
soon be back with Rama. Hanuman caused some general havoc in Lanka and 
was captured by Meghnada or Indrajit, Ravana's son. Ravana ordered that 
Hanuman's tail should be set on fire. But Hanuman used his burning tail to set 
fire to all the houses of Lanka. He then returned to Rama with the news that 
Sita had been found. 
Rama, Lakshmana and the army of monkeys arrived at the shores of the 
ocean. There they built a bridge over the ocean so that they could cross over 
into Lanka. There was a terrible war in which Rama killed the giant 

714 
 



Kumbhakarna, Ravana's brother. Lakshmana killed Indrajit. Rama killed 
Ravana with a powerful divine weapon, the Brahmastra. 
The fourteen years were by now over and Rama, Lakshmana and Sita returned 
to Ayodhya. 
There, Rama was crowned king and he treated his subjects as his own sons. He 
punished the wicked and followed the path of dharma. During Rama's rule 
there was no shortage of foodgrains anywhere and the people were 
righteous. No one died an untimely death. 
On Rama's instructions, Shatrughna killed the asura Lavana and built the city 
of Mathura in the place where Lavana's kingdom had been. Bharataa was sent 
by Rama to kill a wicked Gandharva, a singer of heaven named Shailusha, who 
lived on the banks of the river Indus with his sons. Bharataa killed them and 
built two cities there, Takshashila and Pushkaravati. In Takshashila Bharataa 
established his son Ataksha as king and in Pushkaravati he made his son 
pushkara the king. Rama and Sita had two sons named Kusha and Lava. Rama 
ruled for eleven thousand years before he died. 
This is the story of the Ramayana as recounted in the Agni Purana. It was 
written by the sage Valmiki after he had heard the story from the sage 
Narada. 
Rama was the seventh avatara of Vishnu, Krishna was the eighth. 
The Harivamsha As you have already been told, Brahma emerged from 
Vishnu's navel. Brahma's son was Atri, Atri's son Soma, Soma's son Pururava, 
Pururava's son Ayu, Ayu's son Nahusha and Nahushja's son Yayati. Yayati had 
two wives, Devayani and Sharmishtha. Devayani had two sons, Yadu and 
Turvusu. And Sharmishtha had three sons, Druhya, Anu and Puru. The 
descendants of Yadu were known as the Yadavas. 
Vasudeva was a Yadava. His wife was Devaki. Vishnu was born as sthe son of 
Vasudeva and Devaki in order to remove the wicked from the world. The 
seventh son of Vasudeva and Devaki was Baladeva. And the eight son was 
Krishna himself. Krishna was born in the month of Bhadra in the thick of the 

715 
 



night. Scared that the wicked Kakmsa might kill the newly born child, 
Vasudeva left him with Yashoda, the wife of Nanda. 
Nanda was the king of the cowherds and he brought up Baladeva and Krishna. 
Kamsa sent a Rakshasa woman named Putana to kill Krishna but Krishna killed 
her instead. In Vrindavana, Krishna subdued the terrible snake known as 
Kaliya. He killed several other rakshasas named Arishta, Vrishabha, Keshi, 
Dhenuka and Gardhabha and made the country safe from the attacksof these 
demons. He also stopped the worship of Indra. This led to a fight between 
Indra and Krishna, Indra tried to destroy the inhabitants of Gokula by sending 
down torrents of rain. 
But Krishna held aloft the mountain Govardhana and saved the inhabitants of 
Gokula. 
Kamsa's capital was in Mathura, Baladeva and Krishna went there. Kamsa let 
loose a mad elephant named Kuvalayapida on Krishna. But Krishna killed 
Kuvalayapida. Baladeva and Krishna also killed two strong wrestlers, Chanura 
and Mushtika, whom Kamsa had instructed to kill Baladeva and Krishna. 
Finally, Krishna killed Kamsa and made Ugrasena the king. Kamsa was 
Jarasandha's son-in-law and Jarasandha became furious when he learnt of 
Kamsa's death. He attacked the Yadavas and laid siege to the city of Mathura. 
After a prolonged war, Krishna managed to defeat Jarasandha. Krishna also 
defeated another evil king named Poundraka. On Krishna's instructions, the 
Yadavas built the beautiful city of Dvaraka or Dvaravati. The Yadavas began to 
live in Dvaraka. 
There was an asura named Naraka who was killed by Krishna. Naraka had 
imprisoned sixteen thousand daughters of the devas, Gandharvas and Yakshas 
(guards of Heaven's treasury). These women were freed by Krishna and 
Krishna married all of them. Amongst Krishna's other exploits were defeating 
the daitya Panchajana, killing Kalayavna, seizing the parijata tree from Indra 
and bringing back to life the sage Sandipani's dead son. 

716 
 



Krishna had several sons. Shamba was born of Krishna's wife Jambavati and 
Pradyumna was born of Krishna's wife Rukmini. As soon as Pradyumna was 
born, he was abducted by the asura Shambara. Shambara threw the baby into 
the sea, but a fish swallowed the baby. A fisherman caught the fish and 
brought it to Shambara's house. When the fish's stomach was cut open, the 
baby came out. There was a woman named Mayavati who lived in Shambara's 
house and Shambara handed over baby Pradyumna to Mayavati so that he 
might be brought up well. When he grew up, Pradyumna killed Shambara and 
married Mayavati. They returned to Dvaraka and Krishna was very happy to 
see his lost son. 
Pradyumma and Mayavati had a son named Aniruddha. Aniruddha secretly 
married Usha, the daughter of King Vana, Vana himself being the son of Bali. 
Vana's capital was in a city named Shonitapura. Vana had pleased Shiva 
through hard and difficult tapasya, so that sometimes he was called the son of 
Shiva. Vana loved to fight and he had wanted a boon from Shiva that he might 
get the chance to fight with someone who was his equal in battle. A flag with 
a peacock on it used to fly from the ramparts of Vana's palace. Shiva told him 
the day this flag fell down. 
Vana's desire for with an equal would be satisfied. 
With the help of a friend of Usha's, Anuruddha and Usha used to meet 
secretly in Vana's palace. 
Vana's guards informed him about this and there was a fierce battle between 
Vana and Aniruddha At the same time, the flag with the peacock on it fell 
down. Krishna got to know from Narada about the fight between Vana and 
Aniruddha and he, Baladeva and Pradyumna arrived in Vana's capital. Shiva 
came to fight on Vana's side, accompanied by Nandi and Skanda or Kartikeya. 
But after a duel that lasted for a long time, Krishna triumphed over these 
enemies. 
Krishna's arrows also cut off the thousand arms that Vana had. But at Shiva's 
request, Krishna spared Vana's life and gave two arms with which to make do. 

717 
 



All of these stories about Krishna are related in detail in the Harivamsha. The 
Agni Purana merely gives a brief summary of the Harivamsha. But stories 
about Krishna, the eight avatara of Vishnu, also crop up in the Mahabharataa. 
The Agni Purana, therefore, next summarises the Mahabharataa. 
The Mahabharataa The Pandavas were merely a pretext. Krishna used the 
Pandavas to rid the world of evil men. 
You have already learnt that one of Yayati's sons was Puru. In Puru's line were 
born Bharataa and Kuru. One of Kuru's descendants was the king Shantanu. 
Shantanu married Ganga and Bhishma was born from this marriage. 
But Shantanu also married Satyavati and had two more sons, Chitrangada and 
Vichitravirya. 
Bhishma never married. Chitrangada died young. When Vichitravirya grew up, 
Bhishma defeated the king of Kashi and brought two of the king's daughters, 
Ambika and Ambalika, as brides for Vichitravirya. Vichitravirya as also quite 
young when he died of tuberculosis. 
Since Vichitravirya had left no children, Vyasadeva was brought to 
Hastinapura. Vyasadeva and Ambalika had a son named Dhritarashtra and 
Vyasadeva and Ambalika had a son named Pandu. 
Dhritarashtra married Gandhari and they had a hundred sons, of whom the 
most important was Duryodhana. Pandu had two wives, Kunti and Madri. 
Kunti's sons were Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna and Madri's sons were 
Nakula and Sahadeva. But Yudhisthira was really the son of the God Dharma 
and not Pandu's son. Similarly, Bhima was the son of the God Pavana, Arjuna 
the son of Indra and Nakula and Sahadeva the sons of the two Ashvinis. 
Earlier, Kunti had a son named Karna from the sun-God. 
This was before she had God married to Pandu. Karna became a friend of 
Duryodhana's. Because of a curse imposed on him by a sage, Pandu died in 
the forest. 
Duryodhana tried his best to kill the Pandavas. He set fire to a house of lac 
(jatugriha) in which Kunti and the five Pandavas were staying. But the 

718 
 



Pandavas were saved and fled to a city named Ekachakra. There they lived, 
disguised as Brahmanas. In Ekachakra, they destroyed a rakshasa named Vaka. 
They then won the hand of the daughter of the king of Panchala. Her name 
was Droupadi and all five Pandava brothers married her. When Duryodhana 
learnt that the Pandavas were alive, he handed over half the kingdom to 
them. 
Meanwhile, the forest Khandava had to be burnt and Krishna and Arjuna did 
this together. 
Krishna had befriended Arjuna. When Arjuna successfully defeated the God 
Agni at the burning of the Khandava forest, Agni gave him several divine 
weapons. Arjuna had also obtained divine weapons from his guru 
Dronacharya. 
On the Pandava side, Yudhisthira had become king. The Pandavas organised a 
rajasuya yajna (royal sacrifice) in which they conquered several kingdoms and 
accumulated lot of wealth. This made Duryodhana envious.He arranged a 
game of dice (aksha) between Yudhisthira and Duryodhana's uncle Shakuni. 
Shakuni did not play fairly and Yudhisthira lost the game. As penalty for the 
loss, the Pandavas were to spend twelve years in the forest and one additional 
year without being detected. 
Droupadi went with them to the forest, as did the Pandava's priest, Dhoumya. 
After the twelve years were over, the Pandavas came to the kingdom of King 
Virata where they proposed to spend the additional year that had to be spent 
in disguises. Yudhisthira pretended to be a Brahmana, Bhima a cook, Arjuna a 
dancer, Nakula and Sahadeva stable-hands. Droupadi became the queen's 
maid. The queen's brother Kichaka tried to molest Droupadi, but was killed by 
Bhima. When the year was over, the Kauravas attacked King Virata to rob him 
of his cattle. 
But Arjuna defeated all the Kauravas and saved Virata's cattle. After this 
success, the identity of the Pandavas could no longer be kept a secret. But 

719 
 



thankfully, the one year during which identities had to be kept a secret, was 
over. 
King Virata's daughter Uttara was married to Abhimanyu, Arjuna's son. 
Abhimanyu's mother was Subhadra, whom Arjuna had married. Subhadra also 
happened to be Krishna's sister. 
The Pandavas now demanded their rightful share of the kingdom, but 
Duryodhana refused. A war was imminent. A huge battalion of soldiers was 
known as an akshouhini. Duryodhana collected eleven akshouhinis for the war 
and Yudhisthira collected seven. Krishna was sent as a messenger to 
Duryodhana to try and preserve the peace. Krishna told Duryodhana that the 
Pandavas would be satisfied with a mere five villages. Duryodhana refused to 
give them even this without a fight. 
So the armies gathered for a war on the plains of Kurukshetra. Noticing that 
elders and relatives like Bhishma and Dronacharya were fighting on the side of 
the Kaurvas, Arjuna was reluctant to fight. But Krishna gave Arjuna lessons 
which have come down to us as the Gita. He taught there was no reason for 
sorrow if Bhishma or Dronacharya died, that was only a death of their physical 
bodies. The true identity of a person was his atman (soul) which never died, 
but passed from one body to another. True bliss was obtained when the 
atman united with the Brahman (divine essence) or Paramatman (supreme 
soul). This was always the goal of a yogi, that is, a person who sought union 
with God. 
Thus instructed by Krishna, Arjuna started to fight. With the help of Shikhandi, 
he defeated Bhishma. This happened on the tenth day of the fighting. 
Bhishma did not however die. He had earlier received the boon that he would 
only die when he actually wished to do so. For many days, he lay there in the 
battlefield on a bed of arrows. After Bhishma's defeat, Dronacharya became 
the general on the Pandava side. Dronaharya killed Virata, Drupada and 
several other kings and soldiers on the Pandava side. Dhrishtadyumna also 
killed many Kaurava soldiers. On the fifteenth day of the fighting, a rumour 
gained currency that Ashvatthama, Dronacharya's son, had been killed. 

720 
 



Dronacharya abandoned his weapons on hearing this bad news and 
Dhrishtadyumna faced no problems in killing him. Karna now became the 
Kaurava general and lasted for two and a half days before he was killed by 
Arjuna. Shalya was the last Kaurava general. He fought for only half a day and 
was killed by Yudhisthira.Bhima and Duryodhana fought the last duel of the 
war with maces. Bhima broke Duryodhana's thighs and killed him. 
Ashvatthama had been fuming ever since his father Dronacharya had been 
killed by unfair means. In the dead of the night, he entered the Pandava camp 
where he killed Dhrishtadyumna and the five sons of Droupadi. Droupadi was 
disconsolate and demanded revenge. Arjuna and Ashvatthama let loose divine 
weapons at each other. Since this might destroy the world, they were asked to 
withdraw these weapons. Arjuna could withdraw his weapon, but 
Ashvatthama could not. Ashvatthama's weapon killed the baby that was in 
Uttara's womb, but when the dead baby was born, Krishna brought it back to 
life. This baby was Parikshita. 
Many kings and soldiers died in the course of the Kurukshetra war. The only 
ones left alive were Kritvarma, Kripacharya and Ashvatthama on the Kaurava 
side and Pandava side. After the war was over, Bhishma taught Yudhisthira 
the duties of king. It was only after this that he died. 
As a king, Yudhisthira performed many yajnas and gave a lot of to Brahmanas. 
When Yudhisthira learnt that the Yadvas had been destroyed, he no longer 
wished to rule. He handed over the kingdom to Parikshita and the Pandavas 
left on a pilgrimage, in the course of which they died. 
It was Krishna who had used the Pandavas as a tool to rid the world of evil 
kings and establish the good ones. Realising that the Yadavas were also evil, 
Krishna also ensured that the Yadavas would be destroyed. He then gave up 
his life at the place of pilgrimage that is known as Prabhasa. After Krishna 
died, the city of Dvarka was swallowed up by the sea. This was the story of the 
eighth avatara of Vishnu. 
Buddha The ninth avatara of Vishnu was Buddha. 

721 
 



Many years ago, there was a war between the devas and the asuras in which 
the demons managed to defeat the Gods. The Gods went running to Vishnu 
for protection and Vishnu told them that Mayamoha would be born as 
Buddha, the son of Shuddhodana. Such were the illusions that Buddha 
created, that the asuras left the path indicated by the Vedas and became 
Buddhists. 
These dastardly creatures performed ceremonies that were a sure ticket to 
Naraka. 
Kalki Kalki The tenth avatara of Vishnu will be Kalki. 
Towards the end of the Kali era, all people will be dastardly. They will oppose 
the Vedas, become robbers and will be concerned only with wealth. The 
disbelievers will then become kings and these kings will also be cannibals. 
Much later, Kalki will be born on earth as the son of Vishnuyasha. He will take 
up arms to destroy these disbelievers. Kalki's priest will be the sage 
Yajnavalkya. The norms of he four classes (varna) and the four stages of life 
(ashrama) will be established yet again. People will honor the sacred texts and 
become righteous. It will then be time for the dawn of a new Satya Yuga, a 
fresh period of righteousness. In every cycle (kalpa) and in every era 
(manvantara) Vishnu is thus born in various forms. It is a sacred duty to listen 
to the stories of the ten avataras. 
The listener attains his desires and goes to heaven. 
Creation Agni next told Vashishtha the history of creation. 
Vishnu is the Lord of creation, preservation and destruction. Before creation, 
it was only the Brahman that was everywhere. There was no day, night or sky. 
First Vishnu created the waters. And in the waters he sowed the seeds of 
Brahmanda, the great egg. From this seed there developed a golden egg 
which began to float on the waters. From the egg Brahma created himself. 
Since he created himself (svayam sambhuta), Brahma is also known as 
Svayambhu. Having created himself, Brahma stayed inside the egg for an 
entire year. 

722 
 



And at the end of the year, he split the egg into two. One part of the egg 
formed the heaven, the other the earth. And in between the two parts of the 
egg, Brahma created the sky. 
Brahma next established the earth on the waters and made the ten directions. 
He created time, lightning, thunder, clouds, rainbows, words and anger. To 
ensure that yajnas could be performed, texts of the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda 
and the Sama Veda emerged from his body. Holy people use the Vedas to 
perform Ceremonies meant for the Gods. 
From the powers of his mind, Brahma created seven sons. Their names were 
Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha Kratu and Vashishtha. 
Prithu is recognised as the first king Prithu was descended from Dhruva. And 
Prithu's father Vena was also a king. But Vena was an evil king; he was simply 
not interested in protecting his subjects. The sages therefore killed Vena with 
a straw and after Vena had died, they began to knead the dead body's right 
hand and it was thus that Prithu emerged. He wore armour and carried bow 
and arrows when he was born. He ruled well, as per the dictates of dharma. 
He looked upon all his subjects as his own sons. From Prithu the earth came to 
be known as Prithivi. 
How To Pray, How To Build Temples And Idols The Agni Purana next has 
several chapters on how to pray and on how to build temples and idols. The 
techniques of praying to Vishnu, Shiva, Surya and the other Gods and 
Goddesses are described, including the special mantras (incantations) that 
must be used so as to please specific Gods and there are prescribed forms for 
such bathing as well. 
A person who builds temples is blessed. Even if one merely thinks of building 
temples, the sins of a hundred lives are forgiven. A builder of a single temple 
goes to heaven (svarga). A builder of five to shivaloka, a builder of eight 
vishnuloka and a builder of sixteen temples is freed from the shackles of being 
born again and again. What is the point of earning money if one does not 
build temples? Money is also meant to be donated as alms to Brahmanas, but 

723 
 



the punya or merit earned from building a temple is greater than the punya 
earned from donating alms. The merit earned by builder of temples is greatest 
for a golden temple, lesser for a stone temple, still lesser for a wooden temple 
and least from earthen temple. 
More punya is acquired from building an idol than from building a temple. 
Idols of Gods and Goddesses should always be set up so that they face the 
city; they should not face away from the city. The easy is for Brahma's. Vishnu 
idol can be setup anywhere at all. 
Different idols of Vishnu must have different forms. Consider, for example, 
idols or images of the ten incarnations of Vishnu. The Matsya (fish) avatara 
must naturally look like a fish and the Kurma (turtle) avatara must look like a 
turtle. But the Varaha (boar) avatara will four arms like a man and will hold a 
gada (mace), a padma (lotus flower), a shankha (conch shell) and a chakra 
(bladed discuss) in these four arms. The Narasimha avatara should have two 
arms holding a chakra and a gada and should wear a garland. The Vamana 
(dwarf) avatara should hold an umbrella and a stick in his two hands. 
Parashurama will have four hands with a bow. arrows, a sword and an axe in 
these hands. Rama's image can have either two arms or four. If there are four 
arms, the four hands will hold a bow, arrows, a conch shell and a chakra. 
Balarama's image may also have either four arms or two. If there are two 
arms, the four arms the hands will hold a plough, a conch shell, a club and a 
chakra. Buddha's image should have a calm appearance. It should be seated 
on a lotus. The ears should be elongated. Kalki's image is that of a Brahmana, 
seated on a horse and holding a bow and arrows, a conch shell, a sword and a 
chakra. 
Krishna's image may be either two-armed or four-armed. Three of the four 
arms will hold a gada, a chakra and a shankha. The fourth palm will be opened 
out in the act of granting a boon. On either side of Krishna's image, there will 
be images of Brahma and Shiva. Brahma has four faces and four arms and the 
image should have a pronounced rides a swan. On either side of Brahma's 
image, there will be images of Sarasvati and Savitri. 

724 
 



Vishnu's image has eight arms. Seven of the arms hold a sword, a mace, 
arrow, a bow, a shield, a chakra and a conch shell. The eighth palm is spread 
out as if Vishnu is granting a boon. Vishnu should be shown riding on Garuda. 
Garuda will also have eight arms. To the right of Vishnu's image, there should 
be images of Lakshmi and Sarasvati, Lakshmi holding a lotus and Sarasvati 
holding a veena (a musical instrument). There has also got to be and image of 
Vishnu exhibiting his universal form (Vishvarupa). The Vishavrupa image has 
four heads and twenty arms. 
Chandi's image has twenty arms. The ten arms on the right hold a spear, a 
sword, a Shakti (a small spear), a chakra, a pasha (noose), a shield, a drum and 
any two other weapons. The ten arms on the left hold snakes a rod, an axe, an 
amkusha (used for driving elephants), a bow, a bell, a flag, a mace a mirror 
and a cub. In front of Chandi's image there will be the image of a buffalo with 
its head cut off. The image of an asura will be shown emerging from the body 
of the buffalo. The demon's hair, eyes and garland will be red in colour. It will 
be shown to be vomiting blood and it will hold weapons in its hand, The 
demon's neck will be on the lion and her left leg will be on the demon's back 
Images of Chandi may sometimes also have ten sixteen or eighteen 
arms.Shiva's image (linga) may be made out of earth, wood, iron, jewels, gold, 
silver, copper, bronze or mercury. 
Places Of Pilgrimage A visit to a place of pilgrimage (tirtha) brings the same 
punya that is obtained from performing a yajna. It is because people had not 
gone on pilgrimages or donated gold and cows in their earlier lives that they 
were born poor in their next lives. 
The best place of pilgrimage is Pushkara, Brahma, other Gods and sages who 
wish to go to heaven live there. The best time to go to Pushkara is in the 
month of Kartika. In Pushkara itself there are two other places of pilgrimage 
known as Jambumarga and Tandulik Ashrama. 
It is difficult to go to Pushkara. But there are several other tirthas as well. One 
such is Kurukshetra, where Vishnu and the other Gods keep on coming. The 

725 
 



river Sarasvati flows near Kurukshetra. If one bathes in the Sarasvati, one 
attains Brahmaloka. 
Any region through which the river Ganga flows also becomes a tirtha. Even if 
one sees the Ganga, the punya of per forming yajnas is attained. A person 
who bears earth from the bed of the Ganga on his head is freed of all sins. 
Prayaga is another famous place of pilgrimage. Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and the 
other Gods, Gandharvas, apsaras and the sages are always there in Prayaga. 
This is because the two holy rivers, Ganga and Yamuna, come together in 
Prayaga. There are many tirthas inside Prayaga itself. The sages have said that, 
in the month of Magha, if one bathes for three days in Prayaga, that is better 
than donating crores and crores of cows. If one donates alms in Prayaga, one 
goes to Svarga and is born as a king in one's next life. If one dies in Prayaga, 
one goes straight to Vishnuloka. 
Shiva himself had told Parvati that Varanasi was a very holy tirtha and that 
Shiva never left the city. Varanasi is so named because it is located at the 
junction of two rivers, Varana and Asi. 
Varanasi is also known as Kashi. 
The river Narmada is also sacred. 
There may be several holy tirthas, but Gaya is the holiest of them all. A demon 
named Gayasura once started to perform and such were the powers of his 
tapasya that the Gods began to suffer. 
They went to Vishnu and asked him to save them Vishnu agreed and appeared 
before Gayasura. 
"Accept a boon," said Vishnu. 
"Grant me the boon that I may become the most sacred of all tirthas," replied 
the daitya. 
The boon was granted and Gayasura disappeared. The Gods returned to 
svarga, but felt that the earth seemed to be deserted now that Gayasura had 
disappeared. Vishnu then instructed Brahma and the other Gods to perform a 

726 
 



sacrifice. He also asked them to go to Gayasura and ask for his body so that 
the sacrifice might be performed on it. Gayasura readily agreed, and as soon 
as he agreed, his head fell off from the body. Brahma then proceeded to 
perform the sacrifice on Gayasura's headless body. But as soon as the sacrifice 
started, the body began to shake. This meant that the sacrifice could not be 
properly performed and a solution had to be found. The solution was that the 
Gods should all enter a stone which would be placed on Gayasura's body so 
that the body would not shake. The sacrifice could then be performed. Vishnu 
himself also entered the stone. It is because the Gods and Vishnu are always 
there in Gaya that Gaya is sacred. 
In fact, there is a story behind this stone as well. 
The sage Marichi was Brahma's son and had married Dharmavrata. One day, 
Marichi went to the forest to collect wood and flowers and returned 
extremely tired. He called Dharmavrata and said, "I am very tired. Today you 
must wash my feet for me." Dharmavrata began to wash Marichi's feet when 
Brahma suddenly arrived. Dharmavrata did not know what to do. Should she 
finish washing her husband's feet? Or should she first attend to Brahma, since 
Brahma-was Marichi's father? She decided to attend to Brahma first. At this 
Marichi became very angry and cursed Dharmavrata that she would turn into 
a stone. 
Dharmavrata was greatly distressed at being cursed for what she thought had 
not been a fault at all. So she performed tapasya for many years. When Vishnu 
and the other Gods were pleased at Dharmavrata's meditation, they appeared 
and offered to grant her a boon. 
Dharmavrata wished that the curse imposed on her by Marichi might be 
waived. The Gods explained that this was impossible, since Marichi was a very 
powerful sage. What they would however, do was to make Dharmavrata a 
very holy stone desired even by the Gods. The Gods promised to be always 
inside this stone. It was this stone that was placed on Gayasura's body. 

727 
 



Once the sacrifice was over, Gayasura himself desired a boon from the Gods 
and the Gods granted him that Gaya would become the most sacred of all 
tirthas. It was in Gaya that the Pandavas had prayed to Vishnu. 
Geography The world is divided into seven regions (dvipas. Their names are 
Jambu, Plaksha, Shalmali, Kusha, Krouncha, Shaka, and Pushkara. The seven 
dvipas are surrounded by seven oceans and the names of these oceans are 
Lavana, Ikshu, Sura, Sarpih, Dadhi, Dugdha and Jala. 
Right in the center of Jambudvipa is Mount Meru. Mountains named 
Himavana, Hemakuta and Nishada are to the south of Meru and mountains 
named Nila, Shveta and Sringi are to the north of Meru. Jambudvipa is known 
by that name as there are a large number of jambu (jamun) trees in this area. 
On the top Mount Meru is Brahma's famous city. 
Under the earth is the underworld. This too, consists of seven regions and 
their names are Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatsala and Patala. 
The daityas and the danavas live in the underworld. Vishnu is also there in the 
underworld, in his form of the great snake Shesha. The snake Shesha holds up 
the earth on its hood.That part of the sky which is lit up by sun-rays is known 
as Nabha. Above the earth is the sun, above the sun the moon, above the 
moon the stars, above the stars Mercury, above Mercury Venus, above Venus 
Jupiter and above Jupiter the constellation of the Great Bear 
(saptarshimandala). Beyond this constellation is the world of Dhruva. 
Astrology The Agni Purana next gives a lot of information on astrology. It 
states when marriages should take place and when they should not. For 
example, marriages are never to be held in the months of Chaitra and Pousha 
or under the signs of Libra or Gemini. If one is going on a trip, then Friday is 
the best day to start on. Medicine should not be taken if one of the nakshatras 
(stars) Pushya, Hasta, Jyeshtha, Shravana or Ashvini is not in the sky. If one 
wishes to have a bath after recovering from an illness, then Saturday is the 
best day for such a bath. 

728 
 



The first time a child's head is shaved should never be on Tuesday or a 
Saturday. Ears should be pierced on Wednesday or Thursday. New clothes 
should not first be worn on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. A new house 
should not be entered into the months of Chaitra, Jyeshtha, Bhadra, Ashvina, 
Pousha or Magha. It is best to reap grain on a Wednesday. 
Manvantaras Each manvantara (era) is rule over by a Manu. 
The first Manu was Svayambhuva. Shatakratu held the title of Indra during this 
manvantara. 
The second Manu was Svarochisha. Vipashchita held the title of Indra during 
this manvantara. 
Third Manu was Uttama and Sushanti was Indra then. 
The fourth Manu was tapasa and Shikhi held the title of Indra then. 
The fifth Manu was Raivata and Vitatha was Indra then. 
The title of Indra was held by Manojava during the sixth manvantara, the 
Manu being Chakhusha. 
Next came Shradhadeva, the seventh Manu Puranadara being the Indra. 
The eighth Manu's name is Savarni and the eighth Indra's Bali. The eighth 
manvantara has not yet come. 
The ninth Manu will be Dakshasavarni and the ninth Indra wil be Adbhuta. 
During the tenth manvantara, the Manu will be Brahmasavarni and the title of 
Indra will be held by Shanti.During the rule of the eleventh Manu 
Dharmasavarni, the Indra will be Gana. 
The twelfth Manu will be Rudrasavarni and the twelfth Indra will be 
Ritadhama. 
Rouchya will be the thirteenth Manu and Divaspati will be the thirteenth 
Indra. 
The fourteenth Manu will be Bhoutya and the title of Indra will then be held 
by Shuchi. 

729 
 



During each of Brahma's days, there are fourteen such manvantaras. After 
that comes Brahma's night, when all these living beings are destroyed. 
VarnA Ashrama Dharma All the Manus practised the precepts of dharma 
(righteousness). This meant non-violence, truthfulness, piety, going on 
pilgrimages donating alms, serving devas and Brahmanas, tolerance of all 
religions and the following of the sacred texts. It also meant the practice of 
the system of the four classes (varna) and the four stages in life (ashrama). 
The four varnas are Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras. Performing 
sacrifices, donating alms and studying the Vedas are duties that Brahmanas, 
kshatriyas and vaishyas must perform. In addition, the kshatriyas must protect 
the good and punish the evil. The vaishyas must take care of trade, agriculture 
and animal husbandry. The duties of shudras are to serve the Brahmanas and 
artisanship. When Brahmanas take up the upavita, the sacred thread that is 
the mark of the first three classes, it is like a second birth for them. So 
Brahmanas are known as dvijas (born twice). 
An anuloma marriage is a marriage where the husband is from a higher class 
than the wife. The offspring of such a marriage belong to the mothers‘ class. A 
pratiloma marriage is a marriage where the wife is from a higher class than 
the husband. Chandalas were born this way from Brahmana women, Sutas 
from kshatriya women, Devalas from vaishya women, Pukkashas from 
kshatriya women and Magadhas from vaishya women. Chandalas are 
executioneers, Sutas charioteers, Devalas guards, Pukkashas hunters and 
Magadhas bards. Chandalas should live outside the villages and should not 
touch those belonging to any other class. 
The best name for a Brahmana is that which ends in Sharma. Similarly, the 
best name for a kshatriya ends in Varma, for a vaishya in Gupta and for a 
shudra in Dasa. The sacred thread ceremony is to be held at the age of eight 
years for Brahmanas, eleven years for kshatriyas and twelve years for 
vaishyas. No sacred a thread ceremony should be held beyond sixteen years 
of age. 

730 
 



The first stage in life is that of Brahmacharya (studenthood). A student should 
never eat honey or meat and should never indulge in singing or dancing. He 
should completely give up violence and speaking to women. His duties are to 
discuss the shastras (holy texts) and associate with learned men. Apart from 
that, he will meditate in solitude on the true nature of the Brahman. 
The next stage of life is that of Grihastha (household stage). A Brahmana may 
have four wives, a kshatriya three, a vaishya two and a shudra only one. The 
husband and the wife should be from the same varna. Marriage across varna 
is to be avoided. A woman can marry again provided that her husband has 
disappeared, is dead. has become a hermit or is such a sinner that he is 
expelled from his own varna. If her husband dies, a widow is permitted to 
marry her late husband's younger brother. 
A householder should get up at dawn and pray to the Gods. He should always 
bathe in the morning. He should not talk impolitely. He should not bite his 
nails. He should not laugh at those who are inferior. And he should never 
reside in a place where there is no king, no doctor or no river. He must not 
insult his elders. He should never criticise the Vedas, the shastras, the devas, 
the sages and the king. And he must never travel without a light at night. 
The third ashrama is vanaprastha (forest - dwelling stage). Such a person 
should always sleep on the ground and wear skins as clothes. He should wear 
his hair matted and give up the company of other people. He has to serve 
Gods and guests and live on fruit and roots. 
In the final stage of life (sannyasa) a person becomes a hermit. In this 
ashrama, a person attains true knowledge and is completely freed. But he 
should become a hermit only when he is convinced that he has completely 
lost all interest in material pursuits. Such a person is not affected by birth or 
death. He realises that the physical body is transient, that it is of no concern at 
all. It is the knowledge of the atman (soul) that is the best form of knowledge. 
When one gains this knowledge, one realises the identification of the atman 
with the Brahman, one understands that the Brahman is everywhere. 

731 
 



Sins And Their Atonement If one commits a sin, one has to atone for it. This is 
known as prayashchitta. If one does not atone for the sins that one has 
committed, it is the king's duty to punish the sinner. 
If one drinks from a well where the dead body of an animal has been floating, 
one has to fast for three days. The worst possible sins are the killing of 
Brahmana, the drinking of wine and theft. 
Other sins are criticising the Vedas, the bearing of false witness, killing a 
friend, killing a cow, forsaking one's parents or sons, the selling of ponds, 
murder, lying, killing animals and the cutting down of green trees for fodder. 
A killer of a Brahmana has to build a hut in the forest and live there for twelve 
years. He has to beg for a living and give up all that he possesses to another 
Brahmana. A killer of cows has to live on just coarse grain for a month. He has 
to live with cattle and follow them around during the day. All his possessions 
have to be given up to a Brahmana and he has to bathe in cow's urine for two 
months. 
If a Brahmana steals gold, he should go and report his crime to the king. The 
king will then hit him with a club and this will be the Brahmana's 
prayashchitta. 
The sin of killing kshatriya is one-fourth the sin of killing a Brahmana. If one 
kills a vaishya, the sin is one-eighth the sin of killing a Brahmana. And if one 
kills a shudra, the sin is one-sixteenth of the sin of killing a Brahmana. Killing a 
cat, a mongoose, a frog, a dog, a lizard or a crow is as sinful as killing a shudra. 
Vratas Depending on the tithi (lunar day), the day of the week, the nakshatras 
(stars), the month, the season and the position of the sun, certain specific 
religious rites and ceremonies have to be performed. These are known as 
vratas. 
The first day of the lunar fortnight is known as pratipada. The day of pratipada 
in the months of Kartika, Ashvina and Chaitra are Brahma's tithis. It is then 
that the worship of Brahma must be done. 

732 
 



On the second day of the lunar fortnight (dvitiya), one should eat only flowers 
and pray to the two Ashvinis. This makes the supplicant handsome and lucky. 
Shuklapaksha is that lunar fortnight in which the moon waxes and 
Shuklapaksha dvitiya in the month of Kartika is earmarked for the worship of 
Yama. If one performs this vrata, one does not have to go to naraka (hell). This 
is also the day for praying to Balarama and Krishna. 
It was on the third day of the lunar fortnight (tritiya), in shuklapaksha and in 
the month of Chaitra, that Shiva married Parvati or Gouri. Rites performed on 
this day are thus known as gourivrata. Shiva and Parvati have to be given 
offerings of fruit. The eight names of Parvati have to be recited. These are 
Lalita, Vijaya, Bhadra Bhavani, Kumuda, Shiva, Vasudevi and Gouri. 
Chaturthi vrata is performed on the fourth day of the lunar fortnight, is 
shuklapaksha and in the month of Magha. This is the day for worshipping the 
common Gods (gana devata). The offerings on this occasion are to be wine 
and fragrant perfumes. 
On the fifth day of the lunar fortnight, one performs panchami vrata. This 
grants good health and takes care of bad omens. Particularly auspicious for 
panchami vrata are the shuklapakshas in the months of Shravana, Bhadra, 
Ashvina and Kartika. 
On the sixth day of the lunar fortnight one performs shashthi vrata. One has 
to live only on fruit and if one performs this vrata, the fruits of any action that 
one performs live forever. Shashthi vrata should be observed especially in the 
months of Kartika and Bhadra. 
Surya is to be worshipped on the seventh (saptami) day of the lunar fortnight. 
If saptami vrata is observed in shuklapaksha, all sorrow disappears. Sins are 
stoned for and all one's desires are attained. Women who have no children 
can have sons if they observe these rites. 
The eight day of the lunar fortnight (ashtami) is very significant. Krishna was 
born on this tithi in the month of Bhadra when the nakshatra Rohini was in 
the sky. Ashtami is therefore auspicious in the month of Bhadra. If one fasts 

733 
 



on that day and prays to Krishna, the sins of one's earlier seven lives are 
atoned for. But this vrata is to be observed in krishnapaksha and not in 
shuklapaksha, since Krishna was born in Krishnapaksha. Together with 
Krishna, Rohini and the moon, Devaki, Vasudeva, Yashoda, Nanda and 
Balarama are also to be worshipped on the occasion. Since Krishna took birth 
(janma) on this ashtami tithi, this particular day is known as janmashtami. 
The eighth day of the lunar fortnight can be important even if it is not the 
month of Bhadra. For example, the eighth day of the lunar fortnight might be 
a Wednesday (budha vara) in both shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha. 
Irrespective of the month, such an ashtami is important and is known as 
budhashtami. On that day one has to live only on molasses and rice and 
perform the vrata. 
There used to be a brahamana named Dhira whose wife was named Rambha. 
Dhira's son was Koushika, his daughter was Vijaya and Dhira's bull was named 
Dhanada. Koushika would go with the other cowherds to graze the bull.  
Once when Koushika was having a bath in the river Bhagirathi and the bull was 
grazing, some thieves came and stole the bull. Koushika and his sister Vijaya 
looked everywhere for it, but could not find it. In searching for the bull, they 
came to a lake where some women were bathing in the course of performing 
a vrata. Brother and sister were tired and hungry and they craved for some 
food. The women agreed to give them food, but only after Koushika and 
Vijaya had also performed the budhashtami vrata. And as soon as Koushika 
perfomed the ritual, the bull was miraculously returned to him. Such were the 
powers of the vrata that Koushika could get his sister Vijaya married off to 
Yama and himself became the king of Ayodhya. After their parents Dhira and 
Rambha had died, Vijaya discovered that her father and mother were in 
naraka. When she asked Yama as to how her parents might be delivered from 
naraka, Yama told her that Koushika and Vijaya should perform budhashtami 
vrata again. And immediately after they did so, the parents attained Svarga. 

734 
 



The ninth day of the lunar fortnight is navami and navami in shuklapaksha, 
especially in the month of Ashvina, is earmarked for the worship of Gouri. An 
animal has to be sacrificed and offered to the Goddess on this occasion. 
The Brahmanas become all powerful if they observe dashami vrata on the 
tenth day of the lunar fortnight and donate ten cows. The eleventh day of the 
lunar fortnight (ekadashi) is for fasting. It is also the tithi for praying to Vishnu. 
The observance of ekadashi vrata grants sons and wealth and atones for one's 
sins. 
The twelfth day of the lunar fortnight is dvadashi. Any dvadashi in 
shuklapaksha is auspicious for worshipping Vishnu. Duadashi in the month of 
Bhadra is for praying to cows and calves and in the month of Chaitra it is for 
praying to the God of love (Madana). If one observes dvadashi for an entire 
year, one never has to go to naraka. An especially good conjunction is 
dvadashi in shuklapaksha in the month of Bhadra when the nakshatra 
Shravana is in the sky. if one fasts and observes a vrata then, one earns 
greater punya than from bathing in the confluence of sacred rivers. If Budha 
(Mercury) is also in the sky, the punya is multiplied severalfold. 
Trayodashi vrata is on the thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight and this ritual 
was first performed by the God of lover when he wanted to please Shiva. This 
is the tithi on which Shiva is worshipped. In the month of Ashvina, Indra is also 
revered on this tithi. And in the month of Chaitra, the God of love is 
worshipped in shuklapaksha on the same tithi.The fourteenth day of the lunar 
fortnight (chaturdashi) is also earmarked for Shiva, particularly in the month 
of Kartika. One fasts and donates to Brahmanas and thereby attains svarga. 
The chaturdashi in krishnapaksha that comes between the months of Magha 
and Falguna is known as Shivaratri. Then one has to fast and stay awake the 
whole night. Earlier, there used to be an evil hunter named Sundarasena. But 
because he performed a vrata on Shivaratri, all his sins were forgiven. 
NARAKAS (HELLS) If one worships Vishnu with flowers, one never goes to hell. 

735 
 



There are several such hells. Although people do not wish to die, they are 
bound to die once their predestined time span on earth has been exhausted. 
One then has to pay for whatever sins one might have committed. The sinners 
suffer and those who have performed good deeds are naturally rewarded. 
There are in fact two gates that lead into Yama's abode. The good are brought 
by yamadutas (Yama's servants) through the western gate and are then taken 
to svarga. 
Yama's servants bring the evil to him through the southern gate and Yama 
then despatches them to the various hells. 
If one kills a cow, one has to spend one lakh years in a naraka known as 
mahavicha. If one kills a Brahmana or steals land, there is a burning naraka 
named Amakumbha that one goes to. There one suffers till the day when the 
world is destroyed. A killer of women, children or old men stays in Rourava 
naraka for the span of fourteen manavantaras. An arsonist is sent to 
Maharourava and burnt there for an entire kalpa. A thief goes to Tamisra, 
were he is continuously pierced with spears by Yama's servants for several 
kalpas. After that, a thief is taken to Mahatamisra to be bitten by snakes and 
insects. 
If you kill you father or mother, you will be sent to the hell Asipatravana. 
There you will be continuously sliced into pieces with swords. If you burn 
someone to death, you will go to Karambhavaluka where you will be placed 
on burning sands. 
A person who eats sweets alone goes to Kakola and is fed only worms. A 
person who does not perform yajnas goes to Kuttala and is fed blood. An 
oppressor is sent to Tailapaka and is crushed like an oilseed there. A liar is sent 
to the naraka named Mahapata. There are several other narakas for those 
who encourage inter-class marriages, those who kill animals, those who cut 
trees, those who eat too much meat, those who criticise the Vedas, those who 
bear also witness and those who criticise their teachers. 

736 
 



Giving Alms Giving alms is extremely important as means for achieving punya. 
Alms always have to be donated when one goes to visit a temple or a place of 
pilgrimage. The giver must always face the east and the receiver must always 
face the north when alms are being given. Such donations have to be made 
after one has had a bath.The best objects for donations are gold, horses, 
oilseeds, snakes, maids, chariots, trees, houses, daughters and cows. If one 
promises to give something but later goes back on one's promise, one is sure 
to be destroyed. It should be remembered that the entire object of donation 
alms is lost if one expects gratitude or friendship in return. It is better to give 
something to a brother than to a daughter, it is better to give to a father than 
to a mother. 
The entire concept of donation alms is different in the four different eras. In 
Satya Yuga, the giver went out in search of recipient to whom he could give 
something. In Treta Yuga, the recipient had to come to the giver's house 
before he would be given anything. In Dvapara Yuga, the giver never gave 
anything without being asked for it by the recipient. And in Kali Yuga, the giver 
gives only to those who are servile to him. 
Gayatri Mantra Gayatri mantra is a very powerful incantation. 
The human body has many veins. Out of these, ten veins are important and 
their names are Ida, Pingala, Sushumna, Gandhari, Hastijihva, Pritha, Yasha, 
Alambusha, Huha and Shankhini. These veins bear the breath of life. The 
breath of life is called prana vayu. Apart from prana vayu, nine other major 
breaths course through the human body. Their names are Apana, Samana, 
Udana, Vyana, Naga, Kurma, Krikara, Devadatta and Dhananjaya. 
Gayatri is a Goddess worshipped even by Vishnu and Shiva. This Goddess is 
there everywhere, even in every individual's heart in the form of a swan. 
Gayatri mantra is an incantation to the Goddess. If one chants the mantra 
seven times, one's sins are forgiven. Chanting it then times means that one 
attains svarga. To attain worlds (lokas) which are even more desirable than 
svarga, one has to chant gayatri mantra twenty times. If one chants the 
mantra a hundred and eight times. If one chants the mantra a hundred and 

737 
 



eight times, one does not have to be born again. The severest of sins, like 
killing cows, Brahmanas or parents, are forgiven if one chants the mantra a 
thousand times. Gayatri mantra has always to be preceded by the chanting of 
the sacred word Om. 
The King The king's duties are many. He has to punish his enemies, ensure the 
prosperity of his subjects and arrange that his kingdom is ruled well. He has to 
protect the sages who perform tapasya inside the boundaries of his kingdom. 
A king should appoint a wise Brahmana as his priest. His ministers should also 
be wise and his queen should be a woman who follows the path of dharma. 
When a king dies, time must not be wasted. The priest must immediately find 
an auspicious occasion so that a new king can be appointed and crowned. A 
kingdom can never be without a king. 
Before the coronation, a prospective king has to purify himself by rubbing his 
body with mud. 
Mud from a mountain peak is used for the ears, from a Krishna temple for the 
face, from an Indra temple for the back, from a palace for the chest, mud 
raised by an elephant's tusks for the right hand, mud raised by a bull's horns 
for the left hand, mud from a yajna for the things and from a cowshed for the 
feet. After the king has thus rubbed himself with different forms of mud and 
purified himself, he is ready to be anointed. Four types of ministers will 
appoint him. 
Brahmana ministers with golden vessels full of clarified butter will stand of the 
eastern side. 
Kshatriya ministers with silver vessels full of sweet and thickened milk will 
stand on the eastern side. Vaishya ministers with copper vessels full of curds 
will stand on the western side. And shudra ministers with earthen vessels full 
of water will stand on the northern side. The priests will then use material 
from all four directions to anoint the king. Water from all the places of 
pilgrimage will be poured on the king's head and throat. There must be songs 
and musical instruments must be played. 

738 
 



The king will next pray to Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and the other Gods. He will 
look at a mirror, some clarified butter and the various signs of good omen that 
have been placed all around. The king will then be crowned and introduced to 
his ministers, advisers and guards. The priest will be given cows, goats, 
buffaloes and houses by the king. He will also bow before the Brahmanas. 
After all these ceremonies have been completed, he truly becomes the king. 
He circles the fire, touches his guru's feet and with all his soldiers, goes out on 
a procession through the streets so that his subjects can see him. At that time, 
the king must be seated either on an elephant or a horse. After the procession 
is over, the king may return to his palace. 
The king has to appoint many officials. The general has got to be a Brahmana 
or a kshatriya. The charioteer must know about horses and elephants, and 
treasurer must be familiar with different jewels. There has to be a doctor, a 
keeper of elephants, a keeper of horses, a captain for the palace and another 
captain for looking after the women of the royal household. Each person must 
be appointed to the job which suits his expertise and temperament best. 
Anyone thus appointed by a king has to stick to certain rules. He must always 
obey the king's orders and must never do anything that is contrary to the 
king's commands. In public he must always say pleasant things to the king. If 
there are any unpleasant utterances to be made, they have to be made in a 
private audience with the king. Those who serve the king must not be thieves, 
nor must they ever insult the king. They will not dress like the king, nor will 
they become too intimate with the king. They must not divulge royal secrets. 
For a fort, the king should choose a place that cannot readily be attacked by 
enemies. The king must ensure that the Gods are worshipped, the subjects are 
protected and the evils are punished. 
He should never steal form the temples, instead he should build temples and 
set up idols of the Gods there. The Brahmanas must also be protected and the 
king has to make sure that no Brahmanas are killed in his kingdom. For a 
queen, he has to choose a woman who subscribes to these beliefs. 

739 
 



The king will appoint an official to look after every ten villages and another 
official to look after every hundred villages. Spies must be appointed to find 
out all that is going no in the kingdom. 
The king is entitled to one-sixth of all the punya that accrues in his kingdom 
through his subjects. 
But he is also credited with one-sixth of all the sins that are committed in his 
kingdom. The taxes will be levied as per the dictates of the sacred texts. From 
whatever is received as taxes, half will go into the royal treasury and the 
remaining half will be distributed amongst the Brahmanas. If there is a liar, the 
king will impose a penalty on him to the extent of one-eighth of the liar's total 
wealth. If the owner of any property is not known, the king will keep the 
property is not known, the king will keep the property is safe custody for a 
period of three years.  
Once the owner is identified within a period of three years, he can claim the 
property. But beyond three years, he becomes entitled to the property. 
The property rights of any minor orphan are to be protected by the king. If 
there is a theft in the kingdom, the king must immediately replace what has 
been stolen with wealth taken from his own royal treasury. If the thief is 
caught and the stolen goods recovered, they are used to replenish the 
treasury. One-twentieth of profits made form trade are to be paid to the king 
as taxes. One-fifth or one-sixth of foodgrains are to be paid as taxes. One day 
every month, craftsmen will work free of charge for the king. They will only be 
gives food from the royal kitchen. 
The king has to pay proper attention to the princes. They have to be taught 
four types of shastras. 
The first is dharma shastra, which teaches what is right and what is wrong. 
The second is artha shastra, economics. The third is dhanurveda, the art of 
fighting. And the last subject that has to be taught to princes is shilpa, arts and 
crafts. The king has to assign bodyguards to take care of the princes. He must 
ensure that the princes associate with honorable and learned people and not 

740 
 



with undesirable characters. In instances where the princes do not grow up 
properly despite the king's best efforts, the king is free to keep them 
imprisoned. But they should be comfortable in the prison and should not be 
made to suffer there. 
The king should give up hunting, drinking and the playing of dice. He must not 
unnecessarily waste time in travelling around. He must first win over his 
servants through his behaviour and then do the same for his subjects. It is only 
after this has been achieved that he attains a position to conquer his enemies 
through the use of arms. Anyone who brings harm to the kingdom must 
immediately be killed. If the king delays in doing that which has to be done, 
the purpose of the action is completely lost. Nor must the king inform others 
in advance about what is going to be done. No one must get to know about 
the king's intended actions.  
Once the actions have been completed, the fruits of the actions performed 
are information enough for everyone to see. This does not mean that the king 
will not consult his ministers. Of course he will, that is why they are ministers. 
Before sleeping or eating, the king must check whether the bed or the food is 
safe. 
There were seven techniques that kings were supposed to use in ruling their 
kingdoms. These were known as sama, dana, danda, bheda, maya, upeksha 
and indrajala. Of these, the first four are the most famous. Sama means the 
art of gentle persuasion. Dana means the usage of donations or money to 
achieve one's purpose. Danda is punishment. And bheda is the art of 
aggravating dissension amongst parties opposed to each other. Maya means 
to use illusions or deceit and upeksha is to deliberately ignore people so as to 
achieve one's purpose. Indrajala literally means jugglery. In this context, it 
would mean to perform a balancing act amongst opposing pulls and opposing 
parties. 
What sort of punishment the king should mete out is also laid down. If anyone 
lies and says that his possessions have been stolen, he is to be fined an 
amount equal in value to that of the possessions which have supposedly been 

741 
 



stolen. A Brahmana who bears false witness is to be banished from the 
kingdom. A person who kills cows, elephants, horses or camels will have a leg 
or a hand cut off. A thief who steals gold or silver or an abductor of women 
will be executed. 
Execution is also prescribed in cases of arson and poisoning. A wife who does 
not obey her husband shall be torn to death by dogs. A woman who does not 
obey her husband or Brahmanas may also have her nose, ears or arms 
chopped off. She will when be set astride a cow and banished from the 
kingdom. 
Dreams Some dreams are bad omens. In fact, they are nightmares. Examples 
are: dreams about grass or trees growing on one's body, dreams in which the 
dreamer is shaven-headed or is wearing shabby clothes or dreams in which 
one is falling form above. It is also bad to dream of marriages, singing, the 
killing of snakes and the killing of chandalas or animals. If you dream that you 
are drinking oil or eating bird meat, that is also a bad omen. Other examples 
are: where the dreamer dreams that he is playing with monkeys or chandalas, 
when he dreams that devas, Brahmanas, the king or the guru is angry or when 
he dreams that his house had collapsed. 
Remedies have to be found if one dreams such evil dreams. Brahmanas have 
to be worshipped, a yajna has to be performed and the dreamer has to pray 
to Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma, Ganesha or Surya. Dreams dreamt in the first 
quarter of one's sleep normally come true over the next one year. Dreams 
from the second quarter come true over the next six months and dreams from 
the third quarter over the next three months. Dreams from the last quarter 
come true over the next fortnight and dreams dreamt right at dawn come true 
within the next ten days. If one first dreams a good dream and then an evil 
one, it is the evil dream the will come true. Therefore, if one dreams a good 
dream, one should not sleep anymore. One should immediately arise. 
There are many dreams that are good dreams. For example, dreams that 
involve mountains, palaces or snakes. Or the dreamer might dream that he is 
riding on a horse or a bull. It is also good to dream of white flowers in the sky 

742 
 



or to see trees in a dream. Especially good dreams are those of the dreamer's 
possessing many arms or many heads or of grass and bushes sprouting form 
his navel. What if you dream of wearing white garlands or clothes? That too is 
good. If you dream of eclipses of the sun, the moon or the stars, by all means 
rejoice. And if in a dream you see that you have caught hold of the enemy's 
flag, that surely means that you will triumph over the enemy. And if you 
actually dream of defeating the enemy, the interpretation is clear enough. 
Strangely enough, a dream where the dreamer sees that he is eating rice 
pudding is a good dream. As is the case with dreams of drinking wine or blood. 
Or even of eating wet meat. A clear sky in a dream is good. Dreaming of 
milking a cow or a buffalo with one's own mouth is also good. The dream 
continues to be a good one if one dreams of milking a lioness or a she-
elephant thus. Other dreams which have good interpretations are, for 
example, dreams of the dreamer's receiving blessings form devas or 
Brahmanas or of being anointed with water. 
The dreamer who dreams of his coronation is blessed. And he is doubly 
blessed if he dreams that his head has been cut off or that he has died or even 
that his house has been burnt down. The relatives of such a dreamer increase 
in number and he also prospers. It is good to dream of musical instruments 
being played. Or of riding a bull or climbing a tree. Wet clothes, trees laden 
with fruit and clear blue skies in dreams are especially good. 
Omens and Signs If one is about to go out of the house, one should take care 
of any bad omens that there might be. 
Such bad omens are cotton, dried grass, cowdung, coal, molasses, leather, 
hair, a lunatic, a chandala, a widow, a dead body, ashes, bones and a broken 
vessel. If one comes across these as one is about to leave, one should not start 
without pacifying the elements through prayers to Vishnu. The sound of 
musical instruments is not an auspicious sound at the beginning of a journey. 
If the means of transport by which one is travelling breaks down, that too, is a 
bad omen. If weapons break, perhaps you should postpone the journey. The 
same is the case if an umbrella held over one's head happens to fall. If one hits 

743 
 



one's head against the lintel of the door as one is about too cross the 
threshold, prayers are again indicated. And never call back someone who has 
just left. That is a bad omen and bodes ill for the success of the journey. 
There are good omens for a departure and if one sees these good omens, the 
journey is bound to be successful. Good omens are white flowers, full vessels, 
meat, distant noises, an old goat, a cow, a horse, an elephant, fire, gold silver, 
a sword, an umbrella, fruit, clarified butter, curds, a conch shell, sugarcane, 
the sound of thunder, lightning and a dead body with no one crying over it. 
Omens are important even if one is not going on a journey. A peacock crying 
on the left means that something is going to be stolen. If a donkey brays with 
a broken voice, that is good omen and something good will happen. If a boar 
or a buffalo crosses over from the left to the right, that is a good omen. But if 
they cross over from the right to the left, that is a bad omen. One's desires will 
be attained if horses, tigers, lions, cats or donkeys cross over from the right to 
the left. 
jackals, moles, lizards, pigs and cuckoos are good omens or the left and 
monkeys are good omens on the right. If a jackal calls once, twice, thrice or 
four times, that is a good omen. It is a bad omen if a jackal calls five or six 
times. It is a very good omen if a jackal calls seven times. 
If crows caw on the left of an army, the soldiers will not be able to win. If a 
crow can be seen near the door a house, this means that there will soon be a 
guest. A crow looking at the sum with one eye signifies great danger. A crow 
covered with mud means the attainment of one's desires. 
A dog barking inside the house leads to the death of the householders. A 
person whose left limbs are sniffed by a dog, will attain riches. If the right 
limbs are sniffed, there will be danger. A dog blocking one's path signifies 
theft. A dog with a bone or a rope in its mouth means the loss of property. But 
it is a good omen to see a dog with meat in its mouth. 
Cows mooing irregularly mean threats to the master of the house. If this 
happens at night, there will be a theft or a death in the house. If the cows 

744 
 



have horns that are wet or daubed with mud, that is a good sign for the 
householders. A cow that plays with cranes or doves is bound to die. A cow 
that licks its feet is also destined to die. If an elephant strikes its right foot with 
its left, that is a good sign. Prosperity comes if an elephant rubs its right tusk 
with its foot.There is great danger if an umbrella falls just as one is about to 
leave on a trip. Journeys are to be avoided if the stars are not favourable. 
Battle  
Once a king decides to go out to battle, seven days are needed for 
preliminaries. On the first day, Vishnu, Shiva and Ganesha have to be 
worshipped. On the second day the dikpalas (guardians of all the directions) 
are worshipped, the Rudras on the third day, the planets and the stars on the 
fourth day and the two Ashvinis and the rivers on the fifth day. On the sixth 
day, the king has ceremonial bath in honor of the victory that is to come. And 
on the seventh day, the king leaves to do battle. 
Prior to the marching, the army must always assemble to the east of the 
capital city. The start of the march must be accompanied with the playing of 
musical instruments.  
Once the army has begun to march, it must never look back. After having 
travelled for a couple of miles, it must stop to rest any pray to the Gods and 
the Brahmanas. 
The king must never directly fight. Because if the king is killed, the battle is 
lost. The king must be right behind his army, not too far away from it. An 
elephant will be guarded by four chariots, a chariot by four horses and a horse 
by four infantrymen. The infantry will also be at the front of army, followed by 
archers and then by the horses. The chariots and the elephants come last of 
all. 
The cowards in the army must not be in the front, they must be at the back. 
The front is for the brave soldiers. To the extent possible, one should fight 
with the sun behind one's army. 

745 
 



If a soldier dies in the course of battle, he goes straight to heaven. The blood 
of brave men wash away all sins. To be struck with a weapon is better than to 
perform many sacrifices. A person who flees form the field of battle performs 
a sin that is worse than that of killing a Brahmana. 
The fight should be between equals. Those who are running away should not 
be killed. Nor should spectators and those who are unarmed be killed. An 
enemy captured in battle should not be kept imprisoned. He should be 
released and treated like a son. 
Rama Precepts Rama had once taught Lakshmana about the duties of a king. 
The Agni Purana now relates these precepts of Rama's. 
The duties of king are fourfold. Firstly, he has to earn wealth. Secondly, he has 
to increase it. 
Thirdly, he has to protect it. And fourthly and finally, he has to donate it. The 
king must also be polite and politeness comes through the conquering of the 
senses. The king must be humble. The senses are like mad elephants. If the 
senses are pampered, like mad elephants, they trample politeness and 
humility underfoot. 
The king must also be non-violent, truthful, clean and forgiving. He should 
take care to observe all the rituals. He should give food to those who are poor. 
He should protect those who seek royal protection. He should always use 
words that are pleasant to hear. The body is here today and gone tomorrow. 
Stupid is the king who Deviates form the path of righteousness to give 
pleasure to a body that is transient. The curses of unhappy people are enough 
to bring down a king. 
There is only one difference between Gods and animals. Gods use pleasant 
word, while animals use rough words. The king must use pleasant words like a 
God. And he must use pleasant words not only for those who are his friends or 
are good, but also for those who are his enemies or are evil. With obeisance 
the king pleases his guru, with good behaviour the righteous, with duties the 
Gods, with live the servants and with alms those who are inferior. 

746 
 



The kingdom has seven components. These are the king, the ministers, the 
friends, the treasury, the army, the forts and the state itself. Of these, the 
most important is the state and it has to be preserved at all costs. The king 
must be extremely careful in the choice of the ministers and the royal priest. 
The king must not choose or consult ministers who are stupid. 
The king's signs are his golden rod or sceptre and an umbrella that is held over 
his head. The umbrella should be made of the feathers of swans, peacocks or 
cranes, but the feathers of different types of birds should not be mixed in the 
same umbrella. The throne should be made of wood and should be 
embellished with gold. A bow can be made of iron, horn or wood. The best 
bow is one that extends over four armlengths. The king can spend upto one 
year's tax revenue on armaments and flags. 
Dhanurveda The section on Dhanurveda is on arms and weapons. 
There are five types of weapons that are used in war. The first category is that 
of yantramukta weapons, released from a machine (yantra). This machine may 
be a launcher or even a bow. The second category is that of panimukta 
weapons, weapons that are flung by the hand (pani). 
Examples are spears and stones. The third category is known as 
muktasandharita. These are weapons that can be flung and also withdrawn. 
The fourth category consists of weapons like swords that are never released 
from the hand during battle. 
These are known as amukta weapons. And the last category of weapons 
consists of brute force and strength. This is of use in bouts of wrestling. 
The best form of fighting is that with bows and arrows. Next comes fighting 
with spears, followed by fighting with swords. Wrestling is the worst form of 
fighting. 
Before aiming, the bow (dhanusha) should be held with the arch pointing 
down towards the earth. The arrow (vana) should be placed against the bow 
with the head pointing down. The bow should now be raised and the lower 
end of the bow should be in line with the archer's navel. The quiver should be 

747 
 



at the back. Before releasing the arrow, the bow should be held firm with the 
left hand and the arrow with the fingers of the right hand. The string of the 
bow should be pulled back such that the tassel of the arrow is between the 
archer's ear and right eye. The body should not be bent when one is releasing 
an arrow. Nor should on get excited. The archer has to be still as a pillar. The 
target has to be in line with the left fist and the archer's posture has to be like 
that of a triangle. It is best to pull back the string of the bow upto the right 
ear. 
A noose (pasha) is ten arms in length, with both ends of the weapon being 
circular. The main body of the weapon is made of rope. There are eleven 
different ways in which a noose may be held. A noose must always be flung 
with the right hand. 
A sword (asi) must hang to the left of the waist. When a sword is to be taken 
out, the scabbard should be grasped in the left hand and the sword should be 
taken out with the right hand. There are thirty-two different way in which a 
sword and a shield may be held. 
Property What happens to a person's debts when he dies? If he does not have 
any sons, the person who inherits the property also inherits the debts and had 
to pay them off. If there is a son, the son pays the debts off. But a woman is 
not to be held responsible for debts contracted by her husband or her son. 
Nor is a man responsible for debts contracted by his wife or son. Exceptions 
are instances where a husband and a wife contract a debt jointly. 
If there are no witnesses to a contracted debt but the king feels that the debt 
was indeed contracted, the king must arrange for the debt to be repaid within 
a period of sixty-four days. In cases of a dispute, the person who b rings a false 
suit will be punished by the king. And a false witness will be given twice the 
punishment that is meted out to the one who brings a false suit. A Brahmana 
who bears false witness will be banished from the kingdom. A person who 
agrees to be a witness, but later withdraws, will be punished eight times as 
much as the bringer of the false suit. A Brahmana who does this will be 
banished from the kingdom. 

748 
 



It is better that the details of a debt contracted be written down, with the 
names of the two parties and the witnesses clearly indicated. If the debtor 
pays in instalments, the details of all such payments must be recorded on the 
written document. Debts made in the presence of witnesses should also be 
repaid in the presence of witnesses. If a witness has to take an oath, the oath 
should be administered after cotton, fire, water or poison has been placed on 
the head of the witness. 
Fire or water can be used to find out if a person is lying or not. If fire is used, 
seven banyan leaves are placed on the accused's hand. A red hop lump of iron 
is then placed on the hand and the accused had to go around a fire seven 
times. If it is found that the hand has not been burnt, the person has been 
telling the truth. And if the hand has been burnt, he had been lying. 
Similarly, an accused person can be immersed in the water and if he does not 
drown, he has been telling the truth. Alternatively, the accused can be made 
to drink poison. If the poison does him no harm, he is truthful. 
If the father makes a will, the property will be divided amongst the sons in 
accordance with the provisions of the will. But if all the sons get an equal 
share of the property, the wife should also be given an equal share, otherwise, 
the father can leave all his property to the eldest son. The sons and the father 
obtain equal shares to any property or debt that has been left by the 
grandfather. But the sons are not necessarily entitled to any property that has 
not been left by the grandfather, but been earned by father. If a son is born 
after the property has been divided, he too will be entitled to an equal share 
of any property left by the grandfather. Daughters are not entitled to 
property. But sons who have go married will use one-fourth of their inherited 
property to get their sisters married. 
DONATING THE PURANAS  
The Agni Purana now describes the benefits of giving alms along with the 
Puranas. The Puranas are to be donated together with cows. And in talking of 

749 
 



the mahaPuranas, the Agni Purana also mentions most of their length, in 
terms of the number of shlokas (couplets) that each has. This is worth stating. 
The Brahma Purana- is twenty-five thousand.  
The Padma Purana- is twelve thousand. 
The Vishnu Purana- is thirteen thousand.  
The Vayu Purana- is fourteen thousand. 
The Bhagavata Purana-is eighteen thousand.  
The Narada Purana- is twenty-five thousand  
The Markandeya Purana- is nine thousand.  
The Agni Purana- is twelve thousand. 
The Brahmavaivarta Purana- is eighteen thousand.  
The Linga Purana- is eleven thousand. 
The Varaha Purana- is fourteen thousand. 
The Skanda Purana- is eighty-four thousand. 
The Vamana Purana- is ten thousand.  
The Kurma Purana- is eight thousand. 
The Matsya Purana- is thirteen thousand.  
The Garuda Purana- is eight thousand. 
The Brahmanda Purana- is twelve thousand. 
The only MahaPurana which is missing from the above list is the Bhavishya 
Purana. You now have a pretty good idea of how long the Puranas are. The 
Skanda Purana is the longest and the Kurma and Garuda Puranas the shortest. 
But unfortunately, the numbers in the Agni Purana are not terribly accurate. 
The Padma Purana has fifty-five thousand couplets and not twelve as stated. 
The Varaha Purana has twenty-four thousands couplets and not fourteen 
thousand. The Agni Purana itself has slightly over fifteen thousand couplets 

750 
 



and not twelve thousand. But at least you have some approximate idea about 
the lengths of the various Puranas. 
The Brahama Purana is to be given in the month of Vaishakha. The Padma 
Purana is to be donated in the month of Jyaishtha. The Vishnu Purana is to be 
donated in the month of Ashada and the Vayu Purana in the month of 
Shravana. The Bhagavata Purana is to be given in the month of Bhadra, the 
Narada Purana in the month of Ashvina, the Markandeya Purana in the month 
of Kartika, the Agni Purana in the month of Margashirsha and the Bhavishya 
Purana in the month of Pousha. The Brahmavaivarta Purana in the month of 
Pousha. The Brahmavaivarta Purana is for the month of Magha, the Linga 
Purana for the month of Falguna and the Varaha Purana for the month of 
Chaitra. 
The Skanda Purana is to be given to Brahmanas. The Vamana Purana is to be 
given in the autumn. The Kurma Purana is to be given together with a golden 
urn. The Matsya Purana is to be donated together with a golden swan. The 
Brahmanda Purana is to be given to Brahmanas. 
Great benefits are also to be derived from hearing the Puranas recited. The 
reciter has to be given alms and the Brahmanas must be given cows, rice and 
land at the time of the recitation. If one arranges for a recitation of the 
Puranas, one lives long, stays healthy and attains heaven. 
Dynasties Brahma was born from Vishnu's navel. Brahma's son was Marichi, 
Marichi's son Kashyapa and Kakshyapa's son Vivasvana. From this line was 
descended Pururava and Pururava's descendants were the kings of the surya 
(solar) dynasty. 
Brahma also had a son named Atri and Atri had a son named Soma. Soma 
performed a rajasuya yajna (royal sacrifice). Having performed the sacrifice, 
Soma became the ruler of all the worlds. 
This made him very arrogant and he abducted the sage Brihaspati's wife Tara. 
This led to a terrible war between the devas and the asuras. Tara was 

751 
 



eventually restored to Brihaspati, but Soma and Tara had a son named Budha. 
From Budha were descended the kings of the chandra (lunar) dynasty. 
There were twelve major wars between the devas and the asuras. The first of 
these was known as the Narasimha War. This took place when Hiranyakashipu 
was the king of the asuras. Vishnu adopted the form of Narsismha and killed 
Hiranyakashipu. He then made Prahlada the king of the demons. The second 
war was the Vamana war and it took place when Bali was the king of the 
demons. Vishnu adopted the form of a dwarf (Vamana) to subjugate the 
demons. The third war was the Varaha war and this took place when 
Hiranyaksha was the king of the demons. 
Vishnu adopted the form of a wild boar (Varaha) and killed Hiranyaksha. The 
fourth war was the Amritamanthana war and this took place over the 
manthana (churning) of the ocean for amrita (nectar). 
The fifth war between the devas and the asuras took place over the abduction 
of Tara and this came to be known as the Tarakamaya war. The sixth war was 
known as the Ajivaka War. The seventh war took place when Tripura led the 
asuras and this was known as the Tripuraghatana war. It was Shiva who killed 
the demon Tripura in this war. The eighth war, the Andhaka war, took place 
when Andhaka led the asuras. It was Vishnu who engineered that Andhaka be 
killed when Andhaka expressed a desire to abduct Shiva's wife. 
The ninth war was known as Vritrasamhara and took place when Vritra led the 
demons. The tenth war was simply known as Jita. In this war, Vishnu killed 
Shalva and the other demons, and Parashurama killed the evil kshatriyas. The 
eleventh war was known as Halahala. An asura named Halahala (poison) had 
invaded Shiva's body and flooded it with poison. But Vishnu managed to 
destroy the demon. In the twelfth war, known as Kolahala, Vishnu destroyed 
an asura named Kolahala (tumult). 
Medicine Dhanvantari was the physician of the Gods and he taught Sushruta 
the art of ayurveda (medicine). 

752 
 



The Agni Purana now describes what the sage Ssushruta had learnt, that is, 
the treatment for various diseases. This does not simply mean the treatment 
of human illnesses. There is a section known as vriksha ayurveda, which 
describes what trees are to be planted where. It describes how a garden is to 
be constructed and maintained. 
The chapters on medicine also describe the treatment of elephants, horses 
and cattle. The mantras (incantations) which are the remedy for snake poison 
are also related. 
LITERATURE AND GRAMMAR  
Thereafter, the Agni Purana has many chapters on literature and grammar. 
It describes the different types of chhanda (metres) that are used in poetry. 
Next it discusses the alphabet. There are sixty-four letters (varna) in the 
alphabet, of which twenty-one are vowels (svara varna). There are three tones 
(svara) in which the letters of the alphabet may be uttered. Their names are 
udatta, anudatta and svarita. There are eight places from which the letters 
may be pronounced. These are the chest, the throat, the head, the back of the 
tongue, the teeth, the nose, the lips and the palate. Pronunciations should be 
clear and audible. They should not be nasal and mumbled. 
The Agni Purana then discusses the alamkaras (rhetoric) that are used in 
poetry and plays. Poetry is entirely different from the shastras (sacred texts) 
and itihasa (history). The sacred texts are full of words and historical texts are 
full of narrations of incidents that took place. But that does not constitute 
poetry. Real men are difficult to find on this earth. Amongst these real men, it 
is difficult to find men who are learned. Amongst the learned men, it is not 
easy to find some who have a poetic sense. And amongst those who have 
poetic sense, it is difficult to find a few who can compose poetry. Poetry is 
impossible without a knowledge of the rules of poetry and even more 
important, without a sense of feeling. 
Sanskrit is the language of the Gods. The language of humans is Prakrita. 
Poetry can be either in Sanskrit or in Prakrita. There are three types of poetry. 

753 
 



These are gadya (prose), padya (poetry) or mishra (a mixture of the two). 
Genuine poetry is, however, only padya Gadya can be of three types-
churnaka, utkalika and vrittagandhi. Churnaka prose is easy on the ears, it has 
very few compouond words. Utkalika prose is hard on the ears, it is full of 
compound words. Vrittagandhi prose is somewhere between churnaka and 
utkalika. An epic must always be split up into sections (sarga). It has to be 
written in Sanskrit, although some mixture of Sanskrit words with Prakrita 
ones is permissible. The theme of an epic must always be good and historical 
elements may be introduced if the author so desires. 
Literature is useless without the flavour of sentiments (rasa). There are nine 
sentiments that are used. The first is hasya (humour). The second is karuna 
rasa (pathos). The third is roudra rasa (that which is wrathful and awe-
inspiring). The fourth is vira rasa (heroic themes). The fifth is bhayanaka rasa 
(horror). The sixth is bibhatsa rasa (vulgar and obscene themes). The seventh 
is adbhuta rasa (that which is strange). The eighth is shanta rasa (placidity). 
And the ninth is Sringara rasa (amorous themes). 
But the sentiments must be used with feeling. Without feeling, all literature 
becomes mediocre. 
Particularly in a play, sentiments can be supplemented with skills (kalal). 
These skills are normally associated with women and there are sixty-four of 
them. The more important ones are singing, playing musical instruments, 
dancing, acting, drawing, making garlands, sewing, hairdressing and using 
magic. 
Grammatical rules of sandhi and samasa (rules for forming compound words) 
are next described. 
The difference between the two is that in sandhi, the two words that are 
being joined retain their original senses in the compound word. The case of 
samasa is different. Sandhi occurs when two varnas (letters) met. Samasa is a 
condensation or conversion of two or more words into one. 

754 
 



Sandhi does not create any new word. Samasa leads to the formation of a 
third word which refers to something related to but distinct from either or any 
of the words combined. Pita (yellow) and ambara (cloth) combined by way of 
sandhi are pronounced pitambara and mean cloth that is yellow. The same 
two words combined by way of samasa result in the third word pitambara 
which means "the one dressed in yellow", that is, Krishna. 
There are several possible declensions of words, depending on the vachana 
and the vibhakti. The vachana refers to the number. Eka-vachana is when 
there is only one (phalam, a fruit) dvivachana when there are two (phale, two 
fruits) and vahu-vachana when there are more than two (phalani, more than 
two fruits). There are three genders, pumlinga (masculine), strilinga (feminine) 
and klivalinga (neuter). Deva, asura, Vishnu are, for example, masculine in 
gender. 
Devi, Kalika or maya are feminine. Pushpa (flower) or phala (fruit) are neuter. 
There are six karakas (cases) and seven vibhaktis (case-endings). The agent 
who performs the action indicated by the kriya (verb), is the kartri or doer. To 
the kartri karaka or nominative case, the prathama vibhakti or first case-
ending is attached. The object of the action is karma and to the karma karaka 
or objective case, the second (dvitiya) case-ending is attached. The means or 
instruments by which the action is performed takes on the karana karaka or 
instrumental cases and the third (tritiya) case-ending. When a gift is given 
irrevocably, the recipient takes on the sampradana karaka or dative case and 
the case-ending in question is the fourth (chaturthi). That which is the source 
of something takes on the apadana karaka or ablative case and the fifth 
(panchami) case-ending. When there is a relation of possessions, the 
possessor takes on the shashthi vibhakti (sixth case-ending). There is no 
counterpart of the possessive case of English grammar because the relation of 
possession is not directly related to the verb (kriya) and therefore to the doer 
(karaka). In case of the location in which the action takes place, the karaka is 
adhikarana (locative case) and the case-ending the seventh (saptami). 

755 
 



Destruction Periodically Pralayas (destructions) take place. A destruction 
comes at the end of four thousand yugas on earth. For a hundred years there 
are no rains and there is widespread drought. 
Thereafter, Vishnu uses the rays of the sun to drink and dry up all the waters 
that there are on earth. Seven different suns appear in the sky and they burn 
up the three worlds of heaven, the earth and the underworld. The earth 
becomes as flat as the back of a turtle. The breath of the great snake (Shesha) 
also serves to burn up the three worlds. 
After the three worlds have been burnt up, dark clouds full of thunder and 
lightning appear in the sky. For a hundred years it continue to rain. The rain 
puts out the fires that have been raging. 
From Vishnu's breath are created tremendous winds and these drive away the 
clouds. But there is water everywhere. And Vishnu sleeps on these waters. For 
an entire kalpa he sleeps. The sages then pray to Vishnu for the three worlds 
to be created yet again. 
Yama And Hell When human beings die, their physical bodies are given up. But 
they acquire new bodies that are known as ativahika bodies. In these bodies, 
they are brought to Yama's abode by Yama's servants. Living beings other 
than human are not brought to Yama. Yama then decides whether the dead 
person should go to heaven or to hell. After he has served his time in heaven 
or in hell, he is born again. Yama further decides what living being the person 
should be born as, depending on the actions in his past life. And so the cycle 
of birth death and rebirth goes on and on. 
Since he keeps tally of all good deeds and all sins, Yama is also known as the 
God Dharma. 
Those who have done good deeds are rewaraded by Yama and those who 
have committed sins are punished. Chitragupta is Yama's accountant, he 
keeps the account of all punya and papa. 
There are twenty-eight circles of hells with many hells located in each circle. A 
sinner may have to go to more than one hell depending on the sins that he 

756 
 



has committed. Some sinners are boiled in oil, others are pierced with spears 
and still others are whipped. Some sinners are fed heated iron balls, others 
are fed blood and rubbish. There are also machines for torturing sinners. 
Terrible birds eat up some sinners. Other sinners have their heads cut off. 
When it is time to be reborn, the killer of a brahamana is born as a deer, dog, 
pig or camel. A drunkard is born as a donkey. A stealer of gold is born as a 
worm or an insect. A killer of a Brahmana may also suffer from tuberculosis. A 
drunkard will have teeth like a dog and a stealer of gold will malformed nails. 
A stealer of food is born dumb. A person who has stolen the property of 
Brahmanas is born as a rakshasa and lives alone in the forest. A stealer of 
fragrant scents is born as a mole. One who steals foodgrains is born as a rat. 
One who steals animals is born as a goat, one who steals milk as cow, one who 
steals fruit as monkey and one who steals meat as a vulture. A stealer of 
clothes is born as a crane and a stealer of salt as a cricket. 
Yoga Yoga is the way to circumvent the miseries of life. True knowledge is that 
which informs one about the true nature of Brahman or Paramatman. The 
atman or jivatman is that which characterises an individual. Yoga means 
union, it is the union of the jivatman with the Paramatman. Yoga concentrates 
one's mind on the Paramatman. 
The first prerequisites of yoga is non-violence. A non-violent person is always 
righteous. The second requirement of yoga is truthfulness. The third 
prerequisite is celibacy. The fourth is controlling one's senses and the last is 
the worship of God. One who practices yoga should not go around collecting 
material possessions. A piece of cloth, a covering against the cold, and a pair 
of sandals are possessions enough for him. 
Before meditating on the true nature of the Paramatman, one has to seat 
oneself in a proper asana (posture). The piece of cloth on which one is to sit 
should be placed in a clean place. One sits on such a seat and tries to purify 
one's atman by controlling one's mind and senses through yoga. 

757 
 



The head and the neck should be held straight up, motionless. The point of 
vision should be directed towards the tip of one's nose. One should not look in 
any direction. The arms should lightly rest on the folded thighs and the right 
hand should be placed, palm upwards, on the left palm. Padmasana (lotus 
position) is one such recommended posture. 
The breath of life (prana vayu) has to be controlled. This process of control is 
known as Pranayama. A finger is placed on the nose when the breath is being 
exhaled. The entire breath should be exhaled from the body. Since rechana 
means exhalation, this process of control is known as rechaka. When the 
breath is inhaled, the inhalation should be such that it fills the entire body. 
Since puraka literally means 'that which fills', this process of control is known 
as puraka. 
When the breath is neither being exhaled nor inhaled, one sits completely still 
like a kumbha (pot) and this is known as kumbhaka. Pranayama makes one 
healthy, swift, enthusiastic, strong and collected. Since the senses are 
controlled, one goes to heaven and avoids going to hell. 
Material pursuits are like the strong current of a river. The atman drowns in it. 
Pranayama alone is not enough. It has to be supplemented with dhyana of 
japa (meditation and contemplation). One contemplates the true nature of 
the Paramatman. The body is like a chariot. 
The senses are its horses, the mind is the charioteer and Pranayama is the 
bridle. An individual who dies while performing dhyana is immediately 
assimilated with Vishnu. 
Dhyana involve four different things, all of which must be in complete 
harmony. The first is the meditator, the second is the act of meditating, the 
third is the object that one is meditating upon and the fourth is the reason 
why one is performing the mediation. One does not have to; sit in a rigid 
posture for dhyana to be possible. It can be done while one is walking, sitting 
or even sleeping. The important aspect is to establish the object of one's 
meditation in one's heart.There are different ways of establishing one's 

758 
 



concentration. As an object of meditation, one can meditate on three 
concentric circles which are black, red and white. In the center of the circles is 
a divine lotus. The lotus has eight petals. One thinks that detachment is the 
stem of the lotus and praying to Vishnu its stamen. Right in the center of the 
lotus is a pure spark of fire and that is the Paramatman. Alternatively, one can 
visualise the Paramatman in a blaze of light, in the center of the lotus. Dhyana 
is far far superior to any yajna that one might perform. 
One particular form of deep and intense meditation is known as samadhi. The 
meditator is then completely still, as calm as the ocean. He loses all track of 
the outside world. He does not hear, smell, see or touch. His mind has no 
wishes and feels nothing. He is completely united with God. 
Such a meditator automatically gets to know all the knowledge that can be 
gleaned from the Vedas or the shastras. He can obtain all the material 
possessions that he wants, but he regards them all as no more important than 
a blade of grass. 
Such a meditator attains supreme knowledge. If you look at various pots full of 
water, you will find that the same sky is reflected in them all. Supreme 
knowledge tells one that, exactly similarly, it is the same atman that is 
everywhere. It is the atman which is the same as the Paramatman, it is this 
atman that is in the water, in energy, in water, in the earth and in metals. 
The atman is everywhere. 
The Knowledge Of The Brahman Brahma jnana is the knowledge of Brahman. 
This knowledge, which gives the ultimate bliss, is nothing but the sense that 
the individual atman is identical with the universal Brahman or Paramatman. 
The physical body is not the atman. Nor are the senses the atman. The mind 
or intelligence is not the atman. Life itself is not the atman. 
The atman is different from all the objects that have been mentioned above. 
The atman is in an individual's heart. It sees everything and senses everything, 
but is different from the physical body. It is this that sages contemplate when 
they meditate. The sky was created from the Brahman, from the sky came 

759 
 



wind, from wind fire, from fire water, from water the earth and from the 
earth the five elements. One has to meditate on the physical body gradually 
disappearing and merging into the Brahman. 
The Brahman is neither true nor untrue. It has neither form nor is it without 
form. The Brahman has several parts, but at the same time it is an integral 
whole. The Brahman cannot be described. 
It cannot be achieved through the power of action. The Brahman is always 
pure. It has no ties and it is the true form of happiness. What is required is the 
sense that it is I, the individual, who am the Brahman. I am nothing but the 
atman and the atman is nothing but the Brahman. This sense is true 
knowledge. The Brahman is the Lord who is the origin of everything and the 
individual is part of the Brahman. It is this knowledge that frees one from the 
ties of the world and this is what Brahman jnana is all about. 
The Brahman is not the earth; it is beyond the earth. The Brahman is not the 
wind, nor is it the sky. The Brahman has no beginning; it is independent of all 
action. The Brahman is huge; it is everywhere. The Brahman not only has no 
form, it is beyond all form. The Brahman cannot be heard. It cannot be 
touched. The Brahman has neither intelligence nor mind. It has no sense of 
ego or vanity. It does not have life, birth, old age or death. 
The Brahman is neither happy nor unhappy. It does not feel hungry or thirsty. 
It cannot be measured. At the same time, it is both nothing and everything. 
Life has five possible ends. By performing yajnas one can attain heaven. By 
performing tapasya one can become an ascetic. By performing actions one can 
attain Brahmaloka. By detachment from material pursuits (vairagya) one can 
merge oneself into nature. And by true knowledge the individual gets 
absorbed into the divine essence. This is known as kaivalya. Detachment 
means to withdraw oneself from the effects of all actions. And knowledge 
means the knowledge that the atman is no different from the Brahman. This is 
known as jnana yoga (the yoga of knowledge). 

760 
 



There are few people who attain this knowledge. One of those was Bharataa. 
Bharataa had done a lot he became very attached to a deer and when he died, 
he died thinking of the deer. The result was that in his next life, Bharataa was 
born as a deer. But the deer happened to be a jatismara, that is, it 
remembered its earlier life. The deer eventually died and Bharataa was again 
born as jatismara human. 
The king of Soubira was once travelling on a palanquin and he wanted 
someone who would bear his palanquin free of charge. The king's servants 
caught hold of Bharataa to bear the palanquin. 
But Bharataa moved slowly and could not keep up with the other bearers. The 
palanquin did not progress and the king asked Bharataa. "Why are you so 
tired? You have not been bearing my palanquin for long. Can't you some toil? 
You look fairly strong to me." Bharataa replied, "I am not strong. Nor am I 
bearing your palanquin. I am not tired, nor am I lazy. I am my atman and feet 
are and my body is balanced on my thighs. My shoulders are on my body and 
your palanquin rests on my shoulders. But I am not my feet, thighs, body or 
shoulders. 
I am the atman. The atman is not carrying you. So why do you say that I am 
beating you?" Bharataa then instructed the king on the mysteries of true 
knowledge. The atman was pure, everlasting, calm, without traits and beyond 
natural characteristics. Since the atman had no traits and since an individual 
was the atman and not the body, it was meaningless to say that an individual 
was strong or weak. The physical body was made of the elements and so was 
the palanquin. 
What was the point therefore in saying that the physical body was bearing the 
palanquin? Heating these words of wisdom, the king fell at Bharataa's feet. 
"Forgive me," he said, "and let go of the palanquin. Who are you?”  
“Who am I?" asked Bharataa. "That is not a question that can easily be 
answered." The king answered, "I fail to understand. Surely the form in which 
you are now existing is who you are.”  

761 
 



“No," said Bharataa. "I am the atman and the atman is the same as the 
Paramatman. The Paramatman is everywhere and therefore, the atman is also 
everywhere. I am everywhere. I am in all physical bodies. It is meaningless to 
ask who you are and who I am. We are all one and the same. Wood has come 
from the trees and this palanquin is made of wood. But is the palanquin wood 
or tree? When you ride on the palanquin, does anyone say that you are riding 
on a tree? Men, women, cows, horses, elephants, birds and trees, these are all 
meaningless names. They are all illusions. Everything is one and the same. I 
am everywhere. If there had been a place or an object where I do not exist, I 
could have everywhere, I do not know how to answer your question. Tell me 
king, are you your head or your stomach? Or is all of it, you? But then, what 
will you call that which is distinct from your physical body? Think about what I 
have said." Bharataa's words were so profound that the king immediately 
accepted Bharataa as a teacher. 
And Bharataa told the king the story of Ribhu and Nidagha. 
The sage Ribhu was Brahma's son. He was also extremely learned. Nidagha 
was Ribu's disciple. 
After Ribhu had taught Nidagha what there was to be taught, Nidagha went to 
the city to see how Nidagha was getting on. Nidagha worshiped his teacher 
and gave him all sorts of things to eat. 
After Ribhu had eaten, Nidagha asked him, "Are you satisfied?”  
“What do you mean?", asked Ribhu. "The question of satisfaction would have 
arisen had I been hungry or thirsty. I am my atman and the atman is always 
satisfied. So what is the Brahman that is omnipresent and so are you. You are 
not distinct from me, we are both part of the same whole. 
I came to teach you this knowledge. Now that you have learnt that the 
Brahman is everywhere, let me leave." After another thousand years had 
passed, Ribhu came to the city again and discovered that Nidagha no longer 
lived in the city. He had begun to live on the outskirts of the city. 
"Why have you given up living in the city?", Ribhu asked Nidagha. 

762 
 



"Because I do not like to live in the city, where there is a king, " replied 
Nidagha. 
"Who is the king?" asked Ribhu. "Point him out to me in this procession that is 
passing. And point out to me the subjects." Nidagha said, "The king is the one 
who is as tall as a mountain peak. He is the one who is riding the elephant. 
The ones who are walking are the subjects.”  
“What do you mean?", asked Ribhu. "The Brahman is in the king and the 
Brahman is in the elephant. How do you distinguish one from the other, how 
do you say that one is riding the other? Is the king the physical body or the 
atman and is the elephant the physical body or the atman? Who is riding on 
whom? I do not understand." This knowledge, that the atman is the same as 
the Brahman, is known as Advaita (unified) Brahma-jnana. Ribhu taught this to 
the king of Soubira. This is the knowledge that all elements are one and the 
same. It is only those who suffer from illusions who think that different 
elements and different beings have different identities.The Gita Krishna had 
taught Arjuna the lessons of the Gita on the plains of Kurukshetra. The Agni 
Purana now relates the essence of the Gita. 
If physical body is alive, that is no reason for rejoicing. Just as, if the physical 
body is dead, that is no reason for mourning. The atman does not die. It does 
not decay, it cannot be destroyed and it is immortal. The atman does not 
warrant any tears that might be shed over it. People who are addicted to 
sensual pleasures cannot realise this. The person who is addicted to the atman 
alone has no desire for anything else. He had no action to perform. He had 
neither gains nor losses. 
The knowledge of this is like a raft that rescues one from the flood of illusions. 
This knowledge frees one from the shackles of all actions (karma), since all 
actions are vested in the Brahman. A person with this knowledge is as pure as 
a drop of water on a lotus flower. Such a person sees himself in everything 
and everything in himself. There are four types of people who worship Vishnu. 
The first category consists of people who are in trouble. The second consists 

763 
 



of people who desire wealth. The third consists of people who are merely 
curious, while the last consists of people who hanker after true knowledge. It 
is the last category of people who realise the union and identity of the atman 
and the Brahman. 
The Brahman is there in the smallest blade of grass. It is there in the most 
powerful and sacred of people. The physical senses mean nothing, they 
merely further the Brahman extends beyond all these senses. The Brahman 
has neither traits, nor is it without traits. 
The Brahman creates and destroys, it is the most powerful of all energies. 
Some realise the identity of the atman and the Brahman through meditation, 
others through actions. 
YAMA GITA  
There was a king named Vajashrava. His son was Nachiketa. Vajashrava 
arranged for a wonderful sacrifice at which he gave away all his wealth. 
Nachiketa asked, "Father, whom have you given me to?" His father did not 
reply, but Nachiketa kept asking again and again. At this, Vajashrava became 
angry and said, "I have given you to Yama." Faithful to his father's word, 
Nachiketa decided to go to Yama's abode. The road was difficult, but 
Nachiketa got their and waited for three days to see Yama. No one return to 
the earth from Yama's abode. But Yama was so pleased to have met Nachiketa 
that he granted him the boon that Nachiketa could return to the earth. 
Nachiketa however, had no desire to accept such a boon. 
Instead, he wanted to know from Yama the true nature of the atman. The 
instructions that Yama gave to Nachiketa have come to be known as the Yama 
Gita.The Agni Purana now recapitulates the essence of the Yama Gita. Yama 
said that it was indeed strange that men craved after positions, possessions, 
houses and clothes. The sages have all taught that one should not get 
addicted to these sensual pleasures. And yet, man did not learn. 
The Brahman is that which possesses nothing and everything. It cannot be 
seen and yet it is everywhere. The atman is like a warrior on a chariot, the 

764 
 



physical body being the chariot, the intelligence the charioteer and the mind 
the bridle. The senses are the horses and the warrior's job is to control the 
horses and target his arrow at the knowledge of the Brahman. Those who are 
truly learned know of the identity between the atman and the Brahman. 
Samadhi is nothing but the recognition of this union. When the physical body 
comes to an end, the atman is free and can merge with the Brahman. 
The Agni Purana's Virtues The last chapter of the Agni Purana describes three 
virtues of the Purana. 
The Agni Purana is most holy. It gives health and ends nightmares. It spreads 
happiness. Ill omens vanish from house where the Agni Purana is kept. A man 
who listens to the recital of the Agni Purana every day, had no need of 
pilgrimages, alms, sacrifices and fasts. Reading one chapter of the text yields 
the same punya as may be obtained from donating a cow. Even if one only 
wishes to hear a recital of the Agni Purana, the sins committed over the 
duration of a day are forgiven. Reading the whole of the text gives one the 
punya that can be obtained by donating hundred cows at a sacred place of 
pilgrimage. Enemies and thieves dare not frequent a house where there is a 
text of the Agni Purana. Ghosts give such a house a miss. A Brahman who 
listens to a recital of the Purana becomes learned in the Vedas. A kshatriya 
becomes the ruler of the world, a vaishya becomes rich and a shudra attains 
good health. Nothing is so sacred as writing down the text of the Purana and 
donating it to Brahmanas. 
Home   
  

765 
 



9. KURMA PURANA  
Introduction  
(The samudra manthana story is given in great detail in the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharataa. As for Lakshmi, some of the Puranas state that she was born 
as the daughter of Khyati and the sage Bhrigu. She was then married to 
Vishnu. But the demons defeated the Gods and Indra. The sage Durvasa 
therefore cursed Lakshmi that she would have to live in the ocean. And when 
the ocean was churned, Lakshmi emerged yet again.) Indra, the other Gods, 
and the sages were charmed at Lakshmi's beauty when she appeared. "Who is 
this wonderful Goddess?" they asked Vishnu."This is Lakshmi," replied Vishnu. 
"She is also known as Shakti. It is with her help that I delude the universe and 
its inhabitants with my illusions (maya). It is Lakshmi who gives me all my 
powers, although she is no different from me in essence." Vishnu then 
proceeded to tell the Gods and the sages the story of Indradyumna. 
Indradyumna Many years ago, there was a king named Indradyumna. He ruled 
the world well and, when he died, was reborn as a Brahmana, (The Brahmanas 
constitute the first of the four classes, their primary duties are to study the 
Vedas and perform sacrifices.) As a Brahmana, Indradyumna observed 
religious rites and meditated. He also stared to pray to the Goddess Lakshmi. 
When Lakshmi appeared, Indradyumna begged of her, "Please tell me about 
yourself. Please give me insight into what constitutes true knowledge.”  
“Even the Gods and the sages are unable to comprehend my true nature," 
replied Lakshmi. "I an Vishnu's illusions and there is no difference between 
him and me. As for knowledge, it is beyond my powers to grant you that. You 
will have to pray to the great Vishnu himself." Having said this, Lakshmi 
disappeared, and Indradyumna started to pray to Vishnu. Several years 
passed, but Indradyumna continued to meditate. Finally, Vishnu appeared and 
instructed Indradyumna on the path to true knowledge. 
"What did you tell Indradyumna?" asked the Gods and the sages. "What was 
this wonderful knowledge?”  

766 
 



“I will repeat it for your benefit," replied Vishnu. 
Since Vishnu repeated his teachings while in the form of a turtle of Kurma, 
these sacred words are known as the Kurma Purana. There are many subjects 
that Vishnu's instructions covered, but let us first start with the concept of 
varna ashrama dharma, Dharma means righteousness and these precepts lay 
down the fundamental principles of righteous conduct. This is typified in the 
system of four varnas (classes) and four ashramas (stages of life). 
VarnAshrama Dharma Vishnu said that before creation began, there was only 
water in the universe and Vishnu slept on these waters. When it was time for 
creation to begin, Brahma emerged from Vishnu's body. And Shiva emerged 
from Vishnu's anger. Lakshmi too was created from Vishnu's body and took 
her place by Vishnu's side. 
Brahma told Vishnu, "Please use this Goddess to delude the beings whom I 
will create. Tell her to sow the seeds of illusions in their minds. Please tell her 
to make the righteous prosper."Vishnu complied. He requested Lakshmi, 
"Please delude and destroy Gods, demons and humans who are about to be 
created. But please leave the righteous alone and make them prosper. I will 
tell you how to know the righteous. They are those that follow the precepts of 
varna ashrama dharma." The Brahmanas constitute the first of the four 
classes. Brahma created nine sons from his mental powers. Their names were 
Marichi, Bhrigu, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksha, Atri and Vashishtha. 
These sons became sages and they were the first Brahmanas. They were 
created from Brahma's mouth. There are six types of action that are 
recommended for Brahmanas. These are yajana (performing sacrifices), 
yajana (acting as priests at sacrifices), dana (donation of alms), pratigraha 
(receiving gifts), adhyapana (teaching and adhyayana (studying). A Brahmana 
who performs these tasks well, attains the wonderful place known as 
prajapatya. (This would seem to be synonymous with Brahma's residence of 
Brahmaloka). 
The kshatriyas constitute the second of the four classes. They were created 
from Brahma's arms. 

767 
 



The duties of kshatriyas include dana (donation of alms), adhyayana (studying) 
and performing yajnas (sacrifices). But their primary duties are to take up 
arms and fight. It is their job to punish the evil and protect the good. A 
kshatriya who performs these tasks well, attains Indra's residence of 
Indraloka. 
The vaishyas constitute the third of the four classes. They were created from 
Brahma's thighs. 
Like the kshatriyas, the vaishyas can also donate alms, study and perform 
sacrifices. But their primary duty is agriculture, (In many other Puranas, trade 
and animal husbandry are mentioned in addition to agriculture). A vaishya 
who performs these tasks well, gets to live with Vayu, the God of the wind. 
The shudras constitute the last of the four classes. They were created from 
Brahma's feet. Their primary duty is to serve the other three classes. In 
addition, a shudra can adopt artisanship as an occupation, A shudra who 
performs these tasks well, will live with the gandharvas (singers of heaven). 
Generally speaking, all four classes have to observe the religion that is 
prescribed in the vedas. 
There are various other shastras (religious texts) that circulate on earth. But 
many of them are against the Vedas. The religion that is prescribed in such 
anti-Vedic texts must not be followed. 
Only sinners follow such religions, and they are doomed to eternal damnation. 
There are four ashramas (stages of life). The first one is Brahmacharya 
(celibate studenthood). 
The primary duties of a person who is in this stage of life are studying the 
Vedas and serving one's guru (teacher) well. He has to live on alms that are 
obtained through begging. When this stage of life if over, there are two 
options that are available to the individual. In rare instances, he may desire to 
devote the rest of his life to studying and meditation. Such a person is known 
as naishthika. More commonly, individuals wish to step into the next stage of 
life. An individual who does so is known as an upakurvana. 

768 
 



The second stage of life is Grihastha (householder stage). A householder's 
primary duties are serving guests, performing sacrifices, donating alms, 
worshipping the Gods and keeping the sacred fire burning in the house at all 
times. In cases where the householder is absent from the house, these 
functions are to be performed by his wife or sons, or even by his priest. a 
householder must not also forget to study a little bit of the Vedas every day. 
The householder stage is superior to the other three stages of life. The reason 
is that the alms provided by a householder are the means of sustenance for 
individuals who are in the other three stages of life. 
A householder may be one of two types. He may be a sadhaka, in which case 
his chief obsession is that of satisfying his friends and relatives. Alternatively, 
there may be a householder who is udasina. This means that he is not really 
interested in his wife, his sons or in the acquisition of material wealth. His 
chief obsession is that of being freed from the bonds of the world. 
The third stage of life is vanaprastha (forest dwelling stage). Such a person 
retires to the forest and lives on fruits and roots. He studies the Vedas, 
performs tapasya (meditation) and observes religious rites. but one should 
never embark on a forest-dwelling stage unless one's mind is ready for it. This 
also means that one must have had sons. Without sons to carry on the line, it 
is not recommended that a householder venture out on the forest-dwelling 
stage. There are two types of forest-dwellers. The first type consists of 
individuals who primarily devote themselves to worshipping the Gods and 
performing religious ceremonies. Such an individual is known as a tapasya, 
because he does do some tapasya. But there are individuals who devote 
themselves entirely to meditation. Such a person is known as a sannyasika, 
since there is very little of difference between him and a sannyasi (hermit). 
The fourth and final stage of life is sannyasa (hermithood). Such individuals 
spend all their time in meditating. They beg food for a living. It is not proper to 
become a hermit unless one's mind has achieved detachment from the world. 
There are two types of hermits. The first type consists of those who are trying 
to realise the true nature of the atman (human soul). Such a person treats all 

769 
 



other individuals as he would treat himself and is known as a yogi. But there 
are also hermits who go through intense meditation so as to attain the 
supreme wisdom. Such a person is known as a paramaeshthika. 
There are various other traits that are demanded by the righteous way of life. 
One must forgive and display pity. One must not be jealous and must be ready 
to sacrifice one's own selfish interests. One must be truthful, practice non-
violence and learn to control the senses. One must also visit tirthas (places of 
pilgrimage). It is also important to realise that one does not perform actions 
for the sake of the fruits of the actions. The fruits of all actions vest with the 
Brahman (the divine essence). In fact, it is a gross misconception to think that 
the specific action is being performed by an individual. All actions are 
performed by the Brahman, the ordinary human being is merely an 
instrument. As long as this realisation is missing, an individual is ignorant and 
is doomed to the shackles of worldly bonds. 
Creation Vishnu next narrated to the Gods and the sages the history of 
creation. 
In the beginning, the Brahman was everywhere. The Brahman had no form, 
but nor was it without form. It had no beginning and no end. It had no traits, 
but nor was it without traits. The Brahman is impossible to describe, sense or 
see.Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are derived from the Brahman, Brahma 
performs the function of a creator, Vishnu that of a preserver and Shiva that 
of destroyer. 
When it was time for creation to begin, the Brahman created water 
throughout the universe. 
Before that, there was nothing. In the water, there appeared a golden 
(hiranya) egg (anda). The egg grew in size and Brahma, the creator, appeared 
inside the egg. Everything that there is in the universe was already there, in in 
embryonic form, inside the egg. There were Gods, the demons humans, the 
sun, the moon, the stars, the planets and the wind. The word garbha means 

770 
 



womb and since Brahma originated from inside a golden (hiranya) egg, he is 
known as Hiranyagarbha. 
Brahma was the first being to be created. He had four faces. He had no birth 
(janana) in the real sense of the term. He is therefore also referred to as Aja 
(without birth). It is also true that he created (bhuva) himself (svayam). It is 
because of this that Brahma is known as Svayambhu. 
Brahma was to be the Lord (pati) of all the subjects who were going to be born 
(praja). Thus, Brahma acquired the name of Prajapati. 
To appreciate how creation took place, it is first necessary to have some 
conception about the nature of time. 
A Digression on Time The smallest unit of time is a nimesha. Fifteen nimeshas 
make one kashtha, thirty kashthas are one kala and thirty kalas constitute one 
muhurta. There are thirty muhurtas in a span of day and night (ahoratra). 
Thirty such ahoratras make up a month. There are two pakshas (fortnight) in 
every month. Six months constitute an ayana and two ayanas a year. There 
are thus twelve months in every year. The names of the two ayanas are 
uttarayana and Dakshainayana. While humans pass through uttarayana, the 
Gods pass through only one day. Similarly, when humans pass through 
Dakshainayana, the Gods pass through merely one night. One year for humans 
is equivalent to a time span of one day and one night for the Gods. 
Twelve thousand years of the Gods make up one mahayuga. This is subdivided 
into four yugas (eras). The names of these eras are Satya Yuga or Krita Yuga, 
Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga. Satya Yuga has four thousand years, 
Treta Yuga three thousand, Dvapara Yuga two thousand and Kali Yuga one 
thousand. This adds up to ten thousand years. But there are also periods that 
join two yugas: (sandhyamsha). Satya Yuga has a sandhyamsha of four 
hundred years, Treta Yuga of three hundred, Dvapara Yuga of two hundred 
and Kali Yuga of one hundred, There will therefore be seven hundred 
additional years between Satya Yuga and Treta Yuga, five hundred between 
Treta Yuga and Dvapara Yuga of two hundred and Kali Yuga of one hundred. 

771 
 



There will therefore be seven hundred additional years between Satya Yuga 
and Treta Yuga, five hundred between Treta Yuga and Dvapara Yuga, three 
hundred between Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga and five hundred between Kali 
Yuga and the next Satya Yuga. 
These are two thousand additional years, and when added up to the earlier 
figure of ten thousand, make up twelve thousand years. 
There are a little over seventy-one manvantaras (eras) in each mahayuga. 
Each manvantara is a time period that is ruled over by a Manu. The first Manu 
in the present kalpa (cycle) was Svayambhuva Manu and there were several 
other Manus after him. Each kalpa in fact passes during one of Brahma's days 
and there are fourteen manvantaras in a kalpa. Stated differently, there are 
one thousand mahayugas in every kalpa. 
Three hundred and sixty kalpas constitute one of Brahma's years. One 
hundred times this time period is known as a parardha. At the end of this 
period, the whole universe is destroyed and Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are 
also destroyed. At the end of the destruction, creation starts afresh and this 
creation is known as sarga. 
There is a smaller process of destruction that takes place at the end of every 
kalpa. Brahma Vishnu and Shiva are not destroyed, but everything else is. The 
creation that comes at the end of this minor destruction is known as 
pratisarga. 
The present kalpa is known as Varaha kalpa. The one that preceded it was 
known as padma kalpa. 
"Why is the present kalpa called Varaha kalpa?" the Gods and the sages asked 
Vishnu. 
Vishnu told them the story of his boar incarnation. 
The Boar Incarnation A Varaha is a boar and the boar incarnation is usually 
catalogued as the third of Vishnu's ten incarnations. 

772 
 



When the universe was submerged in water after the destruction that came at 
the end of padma kalpa, Vishnu slept on the waters. Thus he slept for a 
thousand mahayugas. Since the word nara means water and ayana means 
resting-place, Vishnu is also referred to as Narayana. 
Brahma decided to start creation afresh, but discovered that the earth was 
submerged in water. 
How would his creations survive if there was no earth? He therefore 
requested Vishnu to bring the earth up from under the water. 
Vishnu adopted the form of a boar and went to the underworld. He 
discovered the earth there and raised her up on the tusks of the boar. The 
boar carefully raised the earth and laid her to rest on top of the water. The 
earth began to float like a gigantic boat. 
Since Vishnu raised the earth in the form of a boar at the beginning of the 
kalpa, the present cycle is known as Varaha kalpa. 
(The story of the boar incarnation is rather summarily disposed of in the 
Kurma Purana. The other Puranas describe it at great length. Apart from the 
question of raising up the earth from under the water, the story revolves 
around the demon Hiranyaksha. This demon was the son of the sage Kashyapa 
and his wife Diti. He defeated the Gods and drove them out of heaven. In 
desperation, the Gods started to pray to Vishnu. Hiranyaksha used to live 
under the water and Vishnu entered the water in his form of a boar and killed 
Hiranyaksha. He also recovered the Vedas which had been stolen by 
Hiranyaksha.)Creation continued Brahma first created five sons through his 
mental powers. Their names were Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana, Kratu and 
Sanatakumara These five sons became sages and did not have any offspring. 
Brahma therefore had to create some more beings so that the population of 
the universe might increase. But prior to that, he decided to perform tapasya. 
However, the meditation did not yield him any results and Brahma became 
very angry and disheartened. He started to weep and a teardrop fell on the 
ground. From this drop, there emerged Shiva. 

773 
 



Brahma bowed before Shiva and said, "Please create some living beings." This 
Shiva proceeded to do. But all the beings that Shiva created were mirror 
images of himself. 
That is, they were all immortal. 
"I beg your pardon," retorted Shiva. "That I refuse to do. Old age and disease 
are not objects that should be sought after. In fact, they are evil. I flatly refuse 
to create such evil.”  
“All right then." said Brahma. "I will take care of creation myself. Please stop 
creating." The first objects that Brahma created were water, fire, the sky, 
heaven (svarga), wind, rivers, mountains, oceans, trees, herbs and time. 
Brahma next created eleven sons from his mental powers. Their names were 
Marichi, Bhrigu, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksha, Atri Vashishtha, 
Dharma and Sankalpa. 
(In the earlier section on varna ashrama dharma, only nine sons were 
mentioned. Dharma and Sankalpa did not figure in that list.) Thereafter, 
Brahma created four classes of beings. These were Gods, demons, ancestors 
(pitris) and humans. The demons were born from Brahma's thighs, the Gods 
from his mouth. The snakes (sarpa), the yakshas (demi-Gods), the ghosts 
(bhuta) and the Gandharvas were born next. Cows were born from Brahms's 
stomach, and horses, elephants, donkeys, deer, camels and mules from his 
feet. Herbs and trees emerged from Brahms's body-hair. 
(This account contradicts a more common account given in some of the other 
Puranas, such as the Bhagavata Purana. In the more usual account, all beings 
are descended from the sage Kashyapa. Kashyapa married thirteen of 
Daksha's daughters. These daughters were named Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kashtha, 
Arishtha, Surasa, Ila, Muni, Krodhavasha, Tamra, Surabhi, Sarama and Timi. 
Aditi's offspring were the Gods (adityas), Diti's the demons (daityas). Danu's 
offspring were other demons (danavas), Kashtha's children horses, Arishtha's 
gandharvas, Surasa's demons (Rakshasas), Ila's offspring trees and herbs, 
Muni's the apsaras (dancers of heaven), Krodhavasha's ghosts (pishachas), 

774 
 



Tamra's birds, Surabhi's cattle, Sarama's wild animals and Timi's marine 
creatures. The Kurma Purana itself refers to this alternative account 
subsequently). 
To return to the present account of the Kurma Purana, Brahma thereafter 
divided his body into two. One half was male and was called Svayambhuva 
Manu. The remaining half was female and was called Shatarupa. Manu and 
Shatarupa married and had two sons and two daughters. The sons were 
named Priyavrata and Uttanapada and the daughters were named Prasuti and 
Akuti. 
Since all humans are Manu's descendants, they are known as manava. 
Prasuti married Daksha and they had twenty-four daughters. (The Puranas are 
not at all consistent about the number of daughters Prasuti and Daksha had. 
The number is sometimes twenty-four, sometimes fifty and sometimes sixty). 
Thirteen of the twenty-four daughters were married to Brahma's son Dharma. 
Of the remaining eleven, Khyati was married to Bhrigu, Sati to Shiva, Sambhuti 
to Marichi, Smriti to Angira, Priti to Pulastya, Kshama to Pulaha, Sannati to 
Kratu, Anasuya to Atri, Urjja to Vashishtha, Svaha to the fire-God Agni and 
Svadha to the ancestors (pitris). 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva The Gods and the sages told Vishnu, "We are 
getting a bit confused. You have told us that Brahma emerged from Vishnu's 
body. And yet you have also told us how Brahma was born inside a golden 
egg. Which of these is the correct account? Then again, you have told us that 
Shiva was born from one of Brahma's tears. But we have sometimes heard 
otherwise. Which is right? Please remove this confusion.”  
“There is no confusion," replied Vishnu. "Let me explain it for you." Brahma 
was born from the golden egg right at the beginning, at the time of the 
original creation. 
But at the end of every kalpa there is a minor destruction when all living 
beings other than Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva die. When the destruction is 
over, creation has to start afresh. 

775 
 



At the end of the last kalpa, there was water everywhere in the universe. The 
heaven, the earth and the underworld, were all flooded with water. There 
were no Gods and no sages. Only the great Vishnu slept on the water. He had 
a thousand hoods, a thousand eyes, a thousand arms and a thousand feet. 
This was his form of Ananta, the snake (naga). 
(The Kurma Purana completely identifies Vishnu with Ananta. More 
commonly, the Puranas state that the snake Ananta was the son of Kadru and 
the sage Kashyapa. He pleased Brahma through his prayers and obtained from 
Brahma the boon that he would be permitted to hold up the earth on his 
hoods. The Kalika Purana specifically states that, at the time of destruction, 
Vishnu and Lakshmi rest on Ananta's central hood. The Vishnu Purana adds 
the information that Ananta was one of Balarama's avataras. The names 
Shesha Vasuki and Gonasa are often used synonymously with Ananta.) While 
Vishnu thus slept on the water, a wonderful lotus sprouted from his navel. The 
lotus was gigantic and shone like the sun. Its fragrance spread in all directions. 
Brahma appeared inside the lotus. Since padma means lotus and yoni means 
place of birth, Brahma is also known as Padmayoni. 
Brahma saw Vishnu sleeping on the water and woke him up. "Who are you?" 
asked Brahma."I am Vishnu." replied Vishnu. "I am the origin of everything. 
That will be there in the universe is inside my body.”  
“Is that really so?" asked Vishnu. "Let me see." Vishnu thereupon entered 
Brahma's body. He really found the three worlds, the Gods, the demons and 
the humans inside Brahma's stomach and was greatly surprise. He emerged 
from Brahma's mouth and told Brahma, "What I have seen inside your body is 
truly wonderful. But I too can show you many worlds inside my body. Please 
enter and see for yourself." It was now Brahma's turn to enter Vishnu's body. 
But when Brahma did this, he could find no end to Vishnu's stomach. It was 
true that there were many worlds inside Vishnu's body. 
However, Brahma could find no way of coming out from Vishnu's stomach. He 
finally started to emerge through Vishnu's navel, through the stalk of the lotus 
that was there. 

776 
 



"How dare you try to confine me inside your body?" demanded Brahma, as 
soon as he managed to get out. 
"Please do not get angry." replied Vishnu. "I merely thought that I would play 
with you for a while. Otherwise, it is inconceivable that anyone should dare to 
confine the great Brahma. Please pardon me. And as a token of your pardon, 
please grant me the boon that henceforth, you will be known as my son. After 
all, you did emerge from a lotus that grew out of my navel.”  
“Agreed." said Brahma. "Let us make peace. After all; there is no one else. We 
are the lords of everything, we are parts of the Brahman.”  
“Please do not forget Shiva," responded Vishnu. "Your words will anger him 
and bring about your undoing." While the two were thus conversing, Shiva 
appeared on the scene. He had a third eye in the middle of his forehead and 
his hair was matted. A trident could be seen in his hand. 
"Who is this fellow?" asked Brahma. "He looks like an upstart." Vishnu calmed 
Brahma down. He also gave Brahma divine eyes so that Brahma could 
comprehend the true nature of Shiva. Brahma then started to pray to Shiva. 
Pleased with Brahma's prayers, Shiva agreed to grant Brahma a boon. 
"Please grant me the boon that you will be born as my son," said Brahma. 
Shiva agreed to do so and went away. 
Rudra Brahma returned to his seat on the lotus flower.Suddenly, two demons 
named Madhu and Kaitabha appeared. They were exceedingly strong and 
threatened to destroy everything that Brahma would create. Brahma 
therefore requested Vishnu to kill these two demons. Vishnu created two 
beings from his own body and these two beings killed the demons. 
(The Madhu and Kaitabha story is given in greater detail in other Puranas, 
such as the Kalika Purana. While Vishnu was sleeping, the two demons were 
born from his ears. One of them desired to have some honey as soon as he 
was born. Since the word for honey is madhu, he came to be known as 
Madhu. The other one looked like an insect. Since the word for insect is kita, 
he came to be known as Kaitabha. These brothers attacked Brahma and 

777 
 



Vishnu had to fight with them so as to rescue Brahma. The fight went on for 
five thousand years before Vishnu could kill them. After the demons were 
killed, the fat (meda) from their bodies formed the earth. That is the reason 
why the earth is known as medini. 
After Madhu and Kaitabha had been killed, Brahma could start to create. He 
first created, through his mental powers, the sons whose names have earlier 
been mentioned. Since Shiva had promised that he would be born as 
Brahma's son, Brahma decided to perform tapasya so as to accomplish this. 
He prayed for many years, but nothing happened. In utter frustration, Brahma 
began to cry. The ghosts (bhuta and preta) were born from these tears. 
Brahma was so disgusted at having created these awful creatures, that he 
committed suicide. It was then that Shiva was born from Brahma's mouth and 
Brahma revived. 
(You will have noticed the contradiction. Earlier, it had been stated that Shiva 
was born from a teardrop and there had been no mention of Brahma's 
suicide. The suicide is not mentioned in other Puranas either, nor is there any 
mention of Shiva or Rudra being born from a teardrop. In the Vishnu Purana, 
he suddenly appeared in Brahma's lap. In the Padma Purana, he was born 
from Brahma's furrowed brows). 
The baby started to cry as soon as he was born. 
"Don't cry," said Brahma. "Since you cried when you were born, you will be 
known as Rudra." (The Kurma Purana is not specific on why the baby cried. 
The other Puranas state that the baby cried for the want of a name. Brahma 
therefore gave the boy the name of Rudra, as the word rub means to cry. The 
boy continued to cry and Brahma gave him several other names as well. The 
Puranas however disagree about what these various names were). 
In addition to Rudra, Brahma gave the boy the names Bhuva, Sarva, Ishana, 
Pashupati, Bhima, Ugra and Mahadeva. In these eight different forms, Shiva 
was to live in the sun, the water, the sky, the fire, the wind, the trees, the 
bodies of Brahmanas and the moon. 

778 
 



Parvati's Thousand Names Shiva was married to Daksha's daughter Sati. Sati 
died and was reborn as Parvati, the daughter of Himalaya and his wife Mena 
(alternatively, Menaka). Parvati was married to Shiva.In fact, Himalaya and 
Mena prayed so that they might have the Goddess as their daughter. 
Pleased with their prayers, the Goddess arrived before Himalaya and Mena 
and showed them her divine form. She also promised them that she would be 
born as their daughter. 
There were a thousand names of the Goddess that Himalaya recited in the 
course of his prayers (one thousand and eight to be precise). These names are 
as follows. For convenience, we have reproduced them in groups of ten 
names each. 
(1) Shiva, Uma, Paramashakti, Ananta, Nishkala, Amala, Shanta, Maheshvari, 
Nitya, Shashvati. 
(2) Paramakshara, Achintya, Kevala, Shivatma, Paramatma, Anadi, Avyaya, 
Shuddha, Devatma, Sarvaga, 
(3) Achala, Eka, Anekavibhagastha, Mayatita, Sunirmala, Mahamaheshvari, 
Satya, Mahadevai, Niranjana, Kashtha. 
(4) Sarvantarastha, Chitshakti, Atilalasa, Nanda, Sarvvatmika, Vidya, Jyotirupa 
Amrita, Akshara, Shanti. 
(5) Sarvvapratishtha, Nivritti, Amritaprada. Vyomamurti, Vyomalaya, 
Vyomadhara, Achyuta, Amara, Andinidhana, Amogha. 
(6) Karanatma, Kalakula, Svatahprathamaja, Amritanabhi, Atmasamshraya, 
Praneshvarapriya, Mata, Mahamahishaghatini, Pranarupa, Pradhana-
Purushaeshvari. 
(7) Sarvvashakti, Kalakara, Jyotsna, Sarvvakaryaniyantri, Sarvvabhuteshvari, 
Samsarayoni, Sakala, Sarvvashaktisamudbhava, Samsarapota, Durvara. 
(8) Durnirikshya, Durasada, Pranashakti, Pranavidya, Yogini, Paramakala, 
Mahavibhuti, Durddharsha, Mulaprakritidsambhava. 

779 
 



(9) Anadyanantavitava, Paramaghapakarshini, Svargasthityan Tarakarani, 
Sudurvvachya, Duratyaya, Shabdayoni, Shabdamayi, Nadakhya, Nadvigraha, 
Anadi. 
(10) Avyaktaguna, Mahanada, Sanatani, Akashayoni, Yogastha, 
Mahayogeshvareshvari, Mahamaya, Sudushpara, Mulaprakriti, Ishvari. 
(11) Pradhana Purushatita, Pradhana Purushatmika, Purana, Chinmayi, Adi 
Purusharupini, Bhutantavastha, Kutastha, Maha Purushasamjnita, 
Janmamrityujaratita, Sarvvashaktisamanvita. 
(12) Vyapini, Anavachhinna, Pradhananu Praveshinin, Kshetrajnashakti, 
Avyaktalakshana, Malavarjjita, Anadimayasambinna, Prakritigraha, 
Mahamayasamutpanna, Tamasi. 
(13) Pourushi, Dheuva, Vyaktatmika, Krishna, Avyaktatmika, Rrakta, Shukla, 
Prasutika, Akarya, Karyajanani.(14) Nityaprasavadharmini, 
SargaPralayanirmukta, Srishtisthityantadharmini, Brahmagarbha, 
Chaturvimsha, Padmanabha, Achyutatmika, Vaidyuti, Shashvati, Youni. 
(15) Jaganmata, Ishvarapriya, Sarvvadhara, Maharupa, 
Sarvvaisharyasamannita, Vishvarupa, Mahagarbha, Vishveshechhanuvartini, 
Mahlyasi, Brahmayoni. 
(16) Mahalakshmisamudbhava, Maha Vimana-Madhyastha, Mahanidra, 
Atmahetuka, SarvvaSadharani, Sukshma, Avidya, Paramarthiki, Anantarupa, 
Anantastha. 
(17) Purushamohini, Devi, Anekakarasamsthana, Kalatrayavivarjita, 
Brahmajanma, Harimurti, Brahmakhya, Brahmavishnu-Shivatmika, 
Brahmeshavishnujanani, Brahmasamshraya. 
(18) Vyakta, Prathamaja, Brahmi, Mahati, Brahmarupini. 
Vairagyaishvaryadharmatma. 
Brahmamurti, Hridisthita, Apamyoni, Svayambhuti. 
(19) Manasi, Tattvasambhava, Ishvarani, Sarvvani, Shankararddhasharirini, 
Bhavani, Rudrani, Mahalakshmi, Ambika, Maheshvara-Samutpanna. 

780 
 



(20) Bhuktimuktifalaprada, Sarvveshvari, Sarvvavandya, Nitamuditamanasa, 
BrahmendroPendranmita, Shankarechhanuvartini, Ishvararddhasanagata, 
Maheshvarapativrata, Sakridvibhata, Sarvvartisamudraparishoshini. 
(21) Parvati, Himavatputri, Paramanadadyini, Gunadhya, Yogaja, Yogya, 
Jnanamurti, Vikashini, Savitri, Kamala. 
(22) Lakshmi, Sri, Anantavakshahsthalasthita, Sarojanilaya, Ganga, Yoganidra, 
Asurardini Sarasvati, Sarvvavidya, Jagajjveyashtha. 
(23) Sumangala, Vagdevi Varada, Avachya Kirti, Sarvvarthasadhika, Yogishvari, 
Brahmavidya, Mahavidya, Sushobhana. 
(24) Guhyavidya, Atmavidya, Dharmavidya,Atmabhavita, Svaha, 
Vishvambhara, Siddhi, Svadha, Medha, Dhriti. 
(25) Shruti, Niti, Suniti, Sukriti, Madhavi, Naravahini, Pujya, Vibhavati, Soumya, 
Bhogini. 
(26) Bhogashayini, Shobha, Vamshakari, Lola, Manini, Paramaeshthini, 
Trailokyasundari, Ramaya, Sundari, Kamacharini. 
(27) Mahanubhava, Sattvastha, Mahamahisha-Mardini, Padmamala, 
Papahara, Vichitramaukutangada, Kanta, Chitramabaradhara, Divyabharana-
Bhushita. 
(28) Hamsakhya, Vyomanilaya, Jagasrishtivivarddhini, Niyantri, 
Yantramadhyastha, Nandini, Bhadrakalika, Adityavarna, Koumari.(29) 
Mayuravaravahana, Vrishasanagata, Gouri, Mahakali, Surarchita, Aditi, Niyata, 
Roudri, Padmagarbhavivahana. 
(30) Virupakshi, Lelihana, Mahasuravinashini, Mahafala, Anavadyangi, 
Kamarupa, Vibhavari, Koushiki, Vichitraratnamukuta, Pranatarti-Prabhanjani. 
(31) Karshani, Ratri, Tridashartivinashini, Vahurupa, Virupa, Surupa, 
Rupavarjita, Bhaktartishamani, Bhavya, Bhavatapavinashini. 
(32) Nirguna, Nityavibhava, Nihsara, Nirapatrapa, Tapasvini, Samagiti, 
Bhavankanilayalaya, Diksha, Vidyadhari, Dipta. 

781 
 



(33) Manendrarinipatini, Sarvvatishayini, Vidya, Sarvvasiddhipradyini, 
Sarvveshvarapriya, Tarkshi, Samudrantaravasini, Akalanka, Niradhara. 
(34) Nityashiddha, Niramaya, Kamadhenu, Vrihadgarbha, Dhimati, 
Mohanashini, Nihsankalpa, Niratanka, Vinaya. 
(35) Vinayapriya, Jvalamalasahasradhya, Devadevi, Manomayi, 
Mahabhagavati, Bhaga, Vasudevasamudbhava, Mahendrapendrabhagini. 
(36) Bhaktigamya, Paravara, Jnanajneya, Jaratita, Vedantavishaya, Gati, 
Dakshaina, Dahana, Danta, Sarvvabhutanamaskrita. 
(37) Yoganmaya, Vibhagajna, Mahamoha, Gariyasi, Sandhya, 
Brahmavidyashraya, Vijankurasamudhbuti, Mahashakti, Mahamati, Kshanti. 
(38) Prajna, Chiti, Samvit, Mahabhogindra-Shayini, Vikriti, Shankari, Shanti, 
Ganagandharvasevita, Vaishvanari, Mahashala. 
(39) Devasena, Guhapriya, Maharatri, Shivananda, Shachi, Duhsvapnanashini, 
Ijya, Pujya, Jagaddhatri, Durvineya. 
(40) Surpini, Guhalvika, Gunotpatti, Mahapitha, Marutsuta, 
Havyavahantaragadi, HavyavahasaMudhbhava, Jagadyoni, Jaganmata, 
Janmamrityujaratiga. 
(41) Vuddhi, Mahavuddhimati, Purushantaravasini, Tarasvini, Samadhistha, 
Trinetra, Divisamsthita, Sarvvendriyamanomata, Sarvvabhutahridisthita, 
Samsaratarini. 
(42) Sattvashuddhikari, Shuddhi, Malatrayavinashini, Jagatpriya, Jaganmurti, 
Trimurti, Amritashraya, Nirashraya, Nirahara, Nirankushapododbhava. 
(43) Surupa, Bhavini, Harini, Prabha, Unmilani, Sarvasaha, 
Sarvvapratyayasakshini, Susoumya, Chandravadana, 
Tandavasaktamanasa.(44) Sativashuddhikari, Shuddhi, Malatrayavinashini, 
Jagatpriya, Jaganmurti, Trimurti, Amritashya, Nirashraya, Nirahara, 
Nirankushapadodbhava. 
(45) Chakrahasta, Viochitrangi, Sragvini, Padmadharini, Paravaravidhanajna, 
Mahapuushapurvaja, Vishveshvarapriya, Vidyut, Vidyujjihva, Jitashrama. 

782 
 



(46) Vidyamayi, Sahasrakshi, Sahasravadanatmaja, Sahasrarashmi, Sattvastha, 
Maheshvarapadashraya, Kshalini, Mrinmayi, Vyapta, Padmavodhika. 
(47) Taijasi, Mahamayashraya, Manya, Mahadevamanaorama, Vyomalakshmi, 
Simharatha, Chekitana, Amitaprabha, Vireshvari, Vimanastha. 
(48) Vishoka, Shokanashini, Anahata, Kundalini, Nalini, Padmabhasini, 
Sadananda, Sadakriti, Vagdevata, Sarvvabhutashrayasthita. 
(49) Brahmakala, Vishnushivagraja, Paragati, Kshobhika, Bandhika, Bhedya, 
Bhedabhedavivarjita, Kalalita, Kalarani. 
(50) BrahmaSri, Brahmahridaya, Vyomashakti, Kriyashakti, Jamashakti, 
Abhinna, Bhinnasamsthana, Vashini, Vamshakarini, Guhyashakti. 
(51) Gunatita, Sarvada, Sarvatomukhi, Bhagini, Bhagavatpatni, Sakala, 
Kalakarini, Sarvvavit, Sarvvatobhadra. 
(52) Guhyatita, Guharani, Prakriya, Yogamata, Ganga, Vishveshareshvari, 
Kapila, Akapila, Kanta, Kamalabha. 
(53) Kalantara, Punya, Pushkarini, Bhoktri, Puranadarapurahsara, Poshani, 
Paramaishvaryabhutida, Bhutibhushana, Panchabrahmasamutpatti. 
(54) Paramarthavigraha, Dharmodaya, Bhanumati, Yogijneya, Manojava, 
Manorama, Manoraska, Tapasi, Vadarupini, Vedashakti. 
(55) Vedamata, Vedavidyaprakashini, Yogeshvareshvari, Mata, Mahashakti, 
Manomayi, , Viyanmurti, Vidyunmala, Vihayasi. 
(56) Kinnari, Surabhi, Vidya, Nandini, Nandivallabha, Bharatai, Paramananda, 
Paraparavibhedika, Sarvvapraharanopeta, Kamya. 
(57) Kameshvareshvari, Achintya, Anantavibhava, Bhulekha, Kanakaprabha, 
Kushmandi, Dhanaratnadhya, Sugandha, Gandhadayini, 
Trivikramapadodbhuta. 
(58) Dhanushpani, Shivodaya, Sudurlabla, Dhanadhyaksha, Dhanya, 
Pingalalochana, Shanti, Prabhavati, Dipti, Pankajayatalochana.(59) Adya, 
Hritamalodbhuta, Gomata, Ranapriya, Satkriya, Girisha, Shuddhi, Nityapushta, 
Nirantara, Durga. 

783 
 



(60) Katyayani, Chandi, Charichitanga, Suvigraha, Hiranyavarna, Jagati, 
Jagadyantrapravartika, Sarada, Mandaradrinivasa, Svarnamalini. 
(61) Ratnamala, Ratnagarbha, Pushti, Vishvapramathini, Padmanana, 
Padmanibha, Nityatushta, Amritodbhava, Dhunvati, Dushprakampa. 
(62) Suryamata, Drishadvati, Mahendrabhagini, Soumya, Varenya, Varadayika, 
Kalyani, Kamalavasa, Panchachuda, Varaprada. 
(63) Vachya, Amareshvari, Vandhya, Durjjaya, Duratikrama, Kalaratri, 
Mahabega, Virabhadrapriya, Hita, Bhadrakali. 
(64) Jaganmata, Bhaktamangaladayini, Karala, Pingalakara, Kamabheda, 
Mahasvana, Yashasvini, Yashoda, Shadadhvaparivartika, Shankhini. 
(65) Padmini, Sankhya, Samkhyayogapravartika, Chaitra, Samvatsararuda, 
Jagatsampuranai, Indraja, Shumbhari, Khechari, Khastha. 
(66) Kamburgriva, Kalipriya, Khagadhvaja, Khagaruda, Varahai, Pugamalini, 
Aishvaryapadmanilaya, Virakta, Garudasana, Jayanti. 
(67) Hridguhagamya, Shankareshtaganagrani, Samyastha, Sankalpasiddha, 
Sarvvavijnandayini, Kalikalkavihantrui, Guhyanpanishaduttama, Nishtha, 
Drishti. 
(68) Smriti, Vyapi, Pushti, Tushti, Kriyavati, Vishvamareshvasreshana, Bhukti, 
Mukti, Shiva, Amrita. 
(69) Lohitasarpamala, Bhisani, Naramalini, Anantashayana, Ananta, 
Naranarayanodbhava, Nrisimhi, Daityamathini, Shankachakragadadhara, 
Ambika. 
(70) Sankarshanasamutpatti, Padasamshrava, Mahajvala, Mahabhuti, Sumurti, 
Sarvvakamadhuka, Suprabha, Sustani, Souri, Dharmakamarthamokshada. 
(71) Bhrumadhyanilaya, Purva, PuranaPurusharani, Mahavibhutida, Madhya, 
Sarojanayana, Sama, Anadya, Nilotpaladalaprabha, Asthadashabhuja. 
(72) Sarvvashaktyasanaruda, Dharmadharmavivarjita, Vairagyajnananirata, 
Niraloka, Nirindriya, Vichitragahanadhara, Shvashvatasthanavasini, 
Sthaneshvari, Nirananda, Trishulavaradharini. 

784 
 



(73) Asheshadevatamurti, Devatavaradevata, Ganambika, Giriputri, 
Nishumbhavinipatini, Avarna, Varnarahita, Trivarna, Jivasambhava, 
Anantavarna.(74) Ananyastha, Shankari, Shantamanasa, Agotra, Gomati, 
Goptri, Guhyarupa, Gunottara, Go, Gih. 
(75) Govyapriya, Gouni, Ganeshvaranamaskrita, Satyabhama, Satyasandha, 
Trisandhya, Sandhivarjita, Sarvvavadashraya, Samkhya, 
Samkhyayogasamudbhava. 
(76) Asamkhyeya, Apramaeyakhya, Shunya, Suddakulodbhava, 
Vindunadasamutpatti, Shambhuvasa, Shashiprabha, Pishanga, Bhedarahita, 
Manojna. 
(77) Madhusudani, MahaSri, Srisamutapatti, Tamohparepratishthita, 
Tritattvamata, Trividha, Susukshmapadasamshraya, Shantyatita, Malatita, 
Nirvikara. 
(78) Nirashraya, Shivakhya, Chittanilaya, Kashyapai, Shivajnanasvarupini, 
Daityadanavanirmukhi, Kalakarnika, Shastrayoni, Kriyamurti, 
Chatruvargapradarshika. 
(79) Narayani, Narodbhuti, Koumudi, Lingadharini, Karmuki, Kalita, Bhava, 
Paravaravibhutida, Vadava, Pararddhajatamahima. 
(80) Vamalochana, Subhadra, Devaki, Sita, Manasvini, Vedavedangaparaga, 
Manyumata, Mahamanyusamundbhava, Amanyu, Amritasvada. 
(81) Puruhuta, Purushatuta, Ashouchya, Bhinnavishaya, Hiranyarajatapriya, 
Hiranyarajani, Haimi, Hemabharanabhushita, Vibhrajamana, Durjneya. 
(82) Jyotishtomafalaprada, Mahnidrasamudbhyuti, Anidra, Satyadevata, 
Dirgha, Kakudmini, Hridya, Shantida, Shantivarddhini, Lakshyadishaktijanani. 
(83) Shaktichakrapravartika, Trishaktijanani, Janya, Shadurmiparivarjita, 
Sudhama, Karmakarani, Yugantadahanatmika, Sankarshini, Jagaddhatri, 
Kamayoni. 
(84) Kiritini, Aindri, Trailokyanamita, Vaishnavi, Paramaeshvari, 
Pradyumnadayita, Datri, Yugamadrishti, Trilochana, Madotkata. 

785 
 



(85) Hamsagati, Prachanda, Chandavikrama, Vrishavesha, Vishyanmatra, 
Vindhyaparvatavasini, Himavanmerunilaya, Kailasagirivasini, 
Chanurahantritanaya, Nitijna. 
(86) Kamarupini, Vedavedya, Vratasnata, Brahmashailanivasini, 
Virabhadrapraja, Vira, Siddha, Mahakamasamudbhava, Vidyanadharanirakriti. 
(87) Apyayani, Haranti, Pavani, Poshani, Kala, Matrika, Manmathodbhuta, 
Varija, Vahanapriya, Sudha. 
(88) KaRishini, Vani, Vinavadanatatpara, Sevita, Sevika, Sevya, Garudatmati, 
Arundhati, Hiranyakshi.(89) Mrigakshi, Manadayini, Vasuprada, Vasumati, 
Vasudhara, Vasundhara, Dharadhara, Vararoha, Characharasahsrada, Srifala. 
(90) Srimati, Srisha, Srinivasa, Shivapriya, Sridhari, Srikari, Kalya, 
Sridhararddhasharirini, Anantadrishti, Akshudra. 
(91) Dhatrisha, Dhanadapriya, Daityasamuhaniyantri, Simhika, Simhavahana, 
Suvarchala, Sushroni, Sukirti, Chhinnasamshaya, Rasajna. 
(92) Rasada, Rama, Lelihana, Amritasrava, Nityodita, Svayamjyotih, Utsuka, 
Mritajivani, Vajratunda, Vajrajihva. 
(93) Mangalya, Mangala, Mala, Nirmala, Malaharini, Gandharvi, Garudai, 
Chandri, Kambalashvatarapriya, Soudamini. 
(94) Janananda, Bhrikutikutilanana, Karnikarakara, Kakshya, 
Kamsapranapaharini, Yugandhara, Yugavarta, Trisandhya, Harshavardhini, 
Pratyakshadevata. 
(95) Divya, Divyagandhathivasana, Shakrasanagata, Shakri, Sadhya, 
Charusharasana, Ishta, Vishishta, Shishteshta, Shishtashishtaprapujita. 
(96) Shatarupa, Shatavarta, Vinata, Surabhi, Sura, Surendramata, Sudyumna, 
Sushumna, Suryasamsthita, Samiksha. 
(97) Satpratishtha, Nivritti, Jnanaparaga, Dharmashastrarthakushala, 
Dharmajna, Dharmavahana, Dharmadharmavinirmatri, 
Dharmikamangalaprada, Dharmamayi, Dharmashakti. 

786 
 



(98) Vidharma, Vishvadharmini, Dharmantara, Dharmamayi, Dharmapurva, 
Dhanavaha, Dharmopadeshtri, Dharmaksha, Dharmagamya, Dharadhara. 
(100) Mahadevaikasakshini, Sadashiva, Vishaynmurti, Vedamurti, Amurtika, 
Paramaeshvari, Shobha, Vishala, Prasannavadana, Hrishtatma. 
This completes the list of the one thousand names given to the Goddess. 
Although Himalaya had used on thousand and eight names in the course of his 
prayers, ten of these names are missing in the list. You will also have noticed 
that a few of the names occur more than once. 
The Line of Uttanapada It is hoped that you have not forgotten that 
Svayambhuva Manu and his wife Shatarupa had a son named Uttanapada. 
Uttanapada's brother was Priyavarta. Dhruva was Uttanapada's son. Dhruva 
was so devoted to Vishnu that Vishnu earmarked for him a place in the 
heaven known as Dhruvaloka. (Dhruva became the Pole Star. The complete 
story of Dhruva and his tapasya in given in the Vishnu Purana). Also in 
Uttanapada's line was born Chakshusha. He became a manu. (Chakshusha was 
the sixth Manu of the present kalpa). In Chakshusha Manu's line was born 
Vena, and Vena's son was Prithu. Prithu milked the earth and obtained 
foodgrains on which people can survive. That is the reason why the earth is 
known as Prithivi. (Prithu's story is given in several Puranas, in addition to the 
Mahabharataa and the Harivamsha). 
Prithu's son was Shikhandi and Shikhandi's son was Sushila. Sushila was a very 
religious person. 
He faithfully studied the Vedas and visited several places of pilgrimage. His 
travels eventually brought him to the Himalayas, through which the sacred 
river Mandakini flowed. Near the banks of the river was a beautiful hermitage. 
It was there that Sushila began to pray to Shiva. While Sushila was thus 
praying, a sage named Shvetashvatara arrived. The sage's body was lean with 
tapasya and he was smeared with ashes. 
Sushila finished praying to Shiva and worshipped the sage. "I am indeed 
fortunate that I have met you," he told Shvetashvatara. "Please make me your 

787 
 



disciple and teach me all that there is to know." The sage agreed. He taught 
Sushila and several other disciples the knowledge of the shastras (sacred 
texts). 
Shikhandi had a brother named Havirddhana. Havirddhana's son was 
Prachinavarhi. He married Savarna, the daughter of the ocean, and had ten 
sons. These sons were known as the Prachetas. 
The Prachetas were devoted to Vishnu and prayed to Vishnu for several years. 
(The Vishnu Purana states that they meditated for ten thousand years under 
the ocean.) All ten Prachetas married Marisha and Daksha was born as a result 
of this marriage. (Marisha's story is given in the Vishnu Purana.) It was this 
Daksha who had earlier been born as Brahma's son. Because he quarrelled 
with Shiva, Shiva cursed Daksha that he would be born as the son of the 
Prachetas. 
"Tell us the story of Daksha," the sages requested Lomaharshana. 
(The Prachetas are not to be confused with a sage named Pracheta. The sage 
Pracheta was Brahma's son, as per the Brahmavaivarta Purana.) Daksha's 
Story Daksha was Brahma's son and had a daughter named Sati. Sati was 
married to Shiva. Daksha was thus Shiva's father-in-law. 
Once Daksha came to visit his son-in-law. But although Shiva worshipped him 
with all due respect, Daksha felt that he had been slighted. Subsequently, 
when Sati went to visit her father, Daksha severely reprimanded her. 
"Your husband is worse than useless," he told his daughter. "My other sons-in-
law are far superior to him. You are not welcome in my house. Return to your 
worthless husband."Sati could not bear to hear this abuse of her husband and 
immolated herself. She was later born as Parvati, the daughter of Himavana 
(the Himalayas) and married Shiva again. 
Shiva was furious to learn that Sati had died. He visited Daksha and cursed him 
that he would be born on earth as the son of a kshatriya. It was thus that 
Daksha had been born as the son of the Prachetas. 

788 
 



(Dakhsa's story is full of inconsistencies in the Puranas. There is an account of 
a yajna that Daksha performed. Shiva either destroyed this yajna himself, or 
had it destroyed by Virabhadra. 
But which Daksha performed this yajna, the one who was the son of Brahma 
or the one who was the son of Prachetas? The Kurma Purana suggests that it 
was the son of the Prachetas who performed this ceremony. The more 
customary account, such as that in the Bhagavata Purana, is that it was 
Brahma's son who performed the sacrifice. Daksha was angered at Shiva 
because, on one particular occasion, Shiva did not stand up to show him 
respect, although Daksha happened to be Shiva's father-in-law. Daksha 
therefore organised a yajna to which he did not invite Shiva. 
Sati went to the ceremony uninvited, and immolated herself when her father 
started criticise her husband. Hearing of Sati's death, Shiva destroyed the 
yajna. He also cursed Daksha that Daksha would have to be born as the son of 
the Prachetas.) To return to the account of the Kurma Purana, the Daksha, 
who was the son of the Prachetas, organised a yajna. All the Gods and sages 
were invited to this ceremony. But as a result of Daksha's earlier enmity with 
his son-in-law, Shiva was not invited. 
There was a sage named Dadhichi who protested at this slight to Shiva. "How 
can you have a religious ceremony without inviting Shiva?" he told Daksha. 
"Shiva is a worthless fellow," replied Daksha. "He is not fit to be worshipped 
together with the other Gods. He wears skulls and destroys all that is created. 
How can he be treated as an equal of the great Vishnu, the preserver of all 
that one can see? My yajna is dedicated to Vishnu. It is not meant for the likes 
of Shiva." Dadhichi tried to persuade Daksha that Shiva should not be ignored, 
but Daksha was in no mood to listen. Dadhichi refused to take part in such a 
yajna and assured Daksha that his ceremony would not be successfully 
completed. He also cursed the other sages, who had sided with Daksha, that 
they would go to hell and would Deviate from the path laid down in the 
Vedas. (The Mahabharataa also records Dadhichi's protest. According to the 

789 
 



Mahabharataa, Dadhichi was devoted to Shiva.) Daksha went ahead with his 
yajna. The other Gods, including Vishnu, came to attend the ceremony. 
Meanwhile, Parvati got to know about the yajna and told Shiva, "How can 
there be a ceremony at which you are not invited? Although Daksha used to 
be my father in my earlier life, this evil act of his should not be condoned. 
Please destroy the ceremony."(If one goes by the more customary account, 
the question of Parvati's asking Shiva to destroy the yajna does not arise. Sati 
died on the occasion of the ceremony and it was the grief of Sati's death that 
led Shiva to exact vengeance. This happened much before Parvati was born as 
the daughter of Himavana.) Because of Parvati's bidding, Shiva created a 
demon named Virabhadra. Virabhadra had a thousand heads, a thousand feet, 
a thousand eyes and a thousand arms. His body shone with radiance like the 
sun at the time of destruction. The thousand arms held all sorts of weapons in 
them. 
"What are my orders?" Virabhadra asked Shiva. 
"Go and destroy Daksha's yajna," was the reply. 
Virabhadra ascended a bull and set out for Daksha's house. He created 
thousands and thousands of demons who would aid him in the task of 
destruction. These demons were armed with spears, tridents, maces, clubs 
and stones. Parvati also created a Goddess named Bhadrakali who would help 
Virabhadra. 
This strange army arrived at the place where the yajna was being held and 
said, "We are Shiva's followers. We have come to receive Shiva's share of the 
offerings.”  
“No offerings have been earmarked for Shiva," replied the Gods and the 
sages. "He has not even been invited to the sacrifice. 
These words angered Virabhadra and he began his task of destruction. His 
companions uprooted the scaffoldings that had been erected on the occasion 
of the sacrifice. The sacrificial horse was flung into the waters of the river 

790 
 



Ganga. (This was an ashvamedha yajna (horse sacrifice) that was being 
performed on the banks of the river Ganga. 
Virabhadra caught hold of Bhaga (identified as the sun-God Surya) and tore 
out his eyes. He smashed the teeth of the God Pusha (also identified as 
another manifestation of the sun-God Surya). As for the moon-God Chandra, 
Virabhadra gave him a resounding kick and sent him reeling. The fire-God Agni 
had his arms and tongue sliced off by Virabhadra's companions. The sages 
were kicked and boxed. 
Vishnu himself came to intervene and Virabhadra began to fight with Vishnu. 
Vishnu has a wonderful weapon named sudarshana chakra (a bladed-discuss) 
and he hurled this at Virabhadra. But Virabhadra easily repelled this weapon 
with his arrows. Vishnu is carried by Garuda, king of the birds. Garuda 
attacked Virabhadra, but so fierce was Virabhadra, that Garuda had to flee. 
The entire universe marvelled to see that Virabhadra could thus vanquish 
Vishnu and Garuda.Brahma now arrived and sought to put an end to the 
fighting. He started to pray to Shiva and Shiva and Parvati arrived on the 
scene. The assembled Gods and sages also began to pray to Shiva and Parvati. 
Parvati was moved to pity by these prayers. 
"These Gods and sages have now sought refuge with you," she told Shiva. 
"Please pardon them their sins.”  
“Agreed," replied Shiva. "You have my blessing snow. But please remember 
that one cannot have a religious ceremony without I being worshipped." The 
Gods and the sages realised that Shiva was no different from Vishnu. They 
were really one and the same, different manifestations of the same universal 
force. 
When Daksha had earlier been born as the son of Brahma, he had married 
Asikli, the daughter of Virana. (There is a minor contradiction here as well. 
Earlier, the Kurma Purana has stated that Daksha's wife was Prasuti. It is of 
course possible that Prasuti and Asikli were different names for the same 
individual.) Daksha and Asikli had one thousand sons. But the sage Narada had 

791 
 



persuaded these sons to become hermits, disinterested in worldly pursuits. 
(The Vishnu Purana given a more complete account. First, five thousand sons 
named the Haryashvas had been born and Narada had persuaded these sons 
to become hermits. Next, one thousand sons named the Shavalashvas had 
been born and these had also become hermits at Narada's instigation. 
Thereafter, sixty daughters had been born.) To return to the account of Kurma 
Purana, Daksha and Asikli had had sixty daughters had been married to 
Dharma, Brahma's son. (There is again a contradiction. In the section on 
creation, the Kurma Purana had stated that thirteen daughters had been 
married to Dharma.) The ten daughters who had been married to Dharma 
were Marutvati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Arundhati, Sankalpa, Muhurta, 
Sadhya and Vishva. Vishva's sons were the Gods known as the vishvadevas, 
Sadhya's sons the Gods known as the sadhyas, Marutvati's sons the Gods 
known as the bhanus. 
(More usually, the Puranas have a completely different account of the birth of 
the maruts. They were born as the sons of Diti, Kashyapa's wife.) Muhurta 
gave birth to time, Lamba to cattle (ghosha), Yami to snakes (nagas), 
Arundhati to all the objects (vishaya) on earth and Sankalpa to resolution 
(sankalpa). 
Thirteen of Daksha's daughters had been married to the sage Kashyapa. Their 
names were Aditi, Diti, Arishta, Danu, Surasa, Khasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, 
Krodhavasha, Ira, Kadru and Muni. 
Twelve Gods known as the adityas were born as the sons of Aditi. Their names 
were Amsha, Dhata, Bhaga, Tvashta, Mitra, Varuna, Aryama, Vivasvana, 
Savita, Pusha, Amshumana and Vishnu. 
Danu's sons were demons (danavas). Chief among them were Tara, Shambara, 
Kapila, Shankara, Svarbhanu and Vrishaparva. (Some Puranas mention forty 
such sons.)Surasa gave birth to the Gandharvas. (More usually, it is stated that 
Surasa was the mother of the snakes (nagas).) Aristha's sons were thousands 
and thousands of snakes (sarpas). 

792 
 



Kadru's sons were also snakes (nagas). 
Tamra's daughters were the ancestors of the birds. Surabhi gave birth to cows 
and buffaloes and Ira to trees and herbs. 
Khasa was the mother of yakshas (demi-Gods), Muni of apsaras and 
Krodhavasha of rakshasas. 
Vinata had two sons named Garuda and Aruna. These two sons performed 
very difficult tapasya. 
Garuda pleased Vishnu and obtained the boon that he would carry Vishnu 
around. Aruna pleased Shiva and obtained the boon that he would become 
the sun's charioteer. (The story of the rivalry between Vinata and Kadru and 
their respective offspring is given in the Bhagavata and Matsya Puranas.) This 
leaves Diti. She had two sons named Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha. These 
two sons were demons and their children came to be known as the daityas. 
Hiranyakashipu was elder to Hiranyaksha. (The Puranas do not agree on this. 
In some Puranas, Hiranyaksha is referred to as the elder brother.) 
Hiranyakashipu Hiranyakashipu pleased Brahma through his prayers. As a 
result of the boon that he received from Brahma, he became invisible and 
started to oppress the world. He drove the Gods out of heaven. 
The Gods and the sages went to Brahma to persuade him to do something 
about Hiranyakashipu. 
"I cannot really help you," said Brahma. "Go to the northern shores of the 
great ocean and pray to Vishnu there. I will accompany you. It is Vishnu alone 
who can find a solution." Brahma led the Gods and the sages to the shores of 
the great ocean and started to pray to Vishnu there. 
Vishnu appeared before them. "Why have all of you come here?" he asked. 
"What do you want?”  
“It is Hiranyakashipu," replied the Gods and the sages. "He is oppressing the 
world thanks to a boon received from Brahma. Because of the boon, he can 
only be killed by you. Please kill him and save the universe." Vishnu created a 
being out of his body. This being was as gigantic as Mount Sumeru and held a 

793 
 



lotus (padma), a conch-shell (shankha) and a mace (gada) in his hands. "Go 
and kill Hiranyakashipu," Vishnu instructed the being.The being thereupon 
ascended Garuda and left for Hiranyakashipu's capital. His roars made the 
ramparts of the city quake. 
Hiranyakashipu had four sons named Prahlada, Anuhrada, Samhrada and 
Hrada. (The more usual names are Prahlada, Anuhlada, Samhlada and Hlada.) 
Accompanied by Hirayakashipu's demon soldiers, these four sons came out to 
fight with the being easily repelled all of these. The four princes then 
unleashed divine weapons on the being. Prahlada used Brahmastra, Anuhrada 
vaishnavastra, Samhrada koumarastra and Hrada agneyastra. But these divine 
weapons could do the wonderful being no harm. He merely picked up the 
princes and flung them far away. 
On seeing that his sons had thus been disposed of, Hiranyakashipu came to 
fight. He gave the being a resounding kick on his chest and the creature fled in 
pain to Vishnu. 
Vishnu now realised that he would have to take care of Hiranyakashipu 
himself. He adopted the form of a being who was a half-man and half-lion. 
Since nara means man and simha means lion, this came to be known as the 
narasimha incarnation (avatara) of Vishnu. 
"Go and kill this peculiar creature," Hiranyakashipu instructed Prahlada. 
Prahlada and his brothers tried to fight with Vishnu, but were defeated easily. 
Hiranyakashipu now sent his brother Hiranyakasha to fight. Hiranyakasha used 
several weapons on Vishnu, including the diving weapon known as Pashupata. 
But these weapons could do Vishnu no harm. 
Meanwhile, Prahlada had realised that this being could be none other than 
Vishnu. He started to pray to Vishnu. He requested his brothers, uncle and 
father not to fight with Vishnu. Vishnu smote Hiranyakashipu's chest with his 
claws and thereby killed him. He also killed Anuhrada, Samhrada and Hrada. 
(A fairly common story in the Puranas, such as the Vishnu Purana, is the story 
of Prahlada. 

794 
 



Despite being Hiranyakashipu's son, Prahlada was devoted to Vishnu from his 
childhood. 
Hiranyakashipu had no desire to have a son who was devoted to Vishnu and 
did his level best to kill Prahlada. But Prahlada was protected by Vishnu and 
survived all these attempts. In the final incident, narasimha appeared while 
Hiranyakashipu was arguing with Prahlada and killed the demon-king. Vishnu 
then crowned Prahlada king in Hiranyakashipu's place. There was no question 
of Hiranyaksha becoming king after Hiranyakashipu. In the more common 
account, Hiranyaksha was the elder brother and had already been killed by 
Vishnu in his boar (Varaha) incarnation. It was Hiranyakasha's death that led 
to Hiranyakashipu's hatred of Vishnu. There is thus some variance between 
this more common account and that related by the Kurma Purana.) 
Hiranyaksha After Hiranyakashipu died, Hiranyaksha became the king of the 
demons. 
Hiranyaksha promptly began to oppress the world. He defeated the Gods and 
drove them out of heaven. He also took the earth down to the underworld. 
The Gods again went to Brahma in search of a solution and Brahma took them 
to Vishnu. They prayed to Vishnu so that Hiranyaksha might be killed. 
Vishnu adopted the form of a boar and killed Hiranyaksha. He also raised the 
earth up to its rightful place. (This was the story that was alluded to when the 
Kurma Purana mentioned Vishnu's boar incarnation.) When Hiranyaksha was 
killed, Prahlada became the king of demons. Initially, he ruled well. He 
worshipped Vishnu and performed yajnas. The kingdom thrived and 
prospered. But on one occasion, Prahlada forgot to worship a Brahmana 
through inadvertence. 
The Brahmana was furious as he thought that Prahlada had done this 
knowingly. "You have dared to ignore me because you thank that you are 
blessed by Vishnu," said the Brahmana. "I curse you that you will forget all 
about Vishnu. Your delusions will make you fight with Vishnu and you will lose 
all your powers." As a result of the Brahmana's curse, Prahlada Deviated from 
the righteous path. He ignored the Brahmanas and the Vedas. He desired to 

795 
 



have revenge on Vishnu for having killed his father and uncle. Prahlada fought 
a long and bitter war with Vishnu. When he was eventually defeated by 
Vishnu, he realised the folly of his evil ways and sought refuge with Vishnu. 
After Prahlada's death, Hiranyaksha's son Andhaka became the king of the 
demons. 
A Digression on Goutama Many years ago, there was a terrible drought on 
earth. There was no food to be had and famine prevailed. There were several 
sages who lived in the forest, and they too, suffered from a lack of food. 
Goutama was a very powerful sage and he had a hermitage in the forest. Such 
were the powers that Goutama had that it never stopped raining in his 
hermitage. There was no famine there and plenty of food was to be had. The 
other sages therefore went to Goutama's hermitage and begged him to 
provide them with food and shelter. This request Goutama readily agreed to, 
and the sages lived there happily. 
After twelve years had passed, it began to rain again. The drought had passed 
and foodgrains started to grow. The sages no begged their leave of Goutama. 
"Stay for a few more days," said Goutama. "Be my guests and bless my 
household." The sages tarried, but they were jealous of Goutama and his 
powers. They therefore plotted to bring about Goutama's downfall. With their 
own powers, they created a black calf. This calf was nothing but an illusion. 
But having created it, the sages sent it to Goutama. Goutama found the calf 
wandering around and decided to take it to his cowshed. But as soon as he 
touched the calf, the calf seemed to die. All this was because of the illusion, 
but Goutama did not know this. He was thunderstruck at having killed a 
cow."You are evil, you have killed a cow," the sages told Goutama. "It would 
be a sin to remain as your guest. We are leaving." By then, Goutama had got 
to know that the calf had been an illusion. He was extremely angry with the 
sages and cursed them, "because you have been evil, you have Deviate from 
the path laid down by the Vedas. You will rot in hell and will have to be born 

796 
 



several times to be freed of your sins." The sages started to pray to Vishnu 
and Shiva. They wished that their sins might be cleansed. 
"What shall we do with these sages?" Shiva asked Vishnu. "Shall we pardon 
them? They are praying for deliverance.”  
“Never," replied Vishnu. "Those who do not follow what is laid down in the 
Vedas will surely rot in hell. But since they are not permitted to follow the 
sacred shastras, let us compose some other shastras for them. They will follow 
those evil shastras, rot in hell and be born on earth several times. That is their 
penance." To delude the sages, Shiva himself pretended to be a great religious 
teacher. He preached evil ways and the stupid Brahmanas began to follow 
what he preached. 
Andhaka While Shiva was gone, he left his companion Nandi to look after his 
household. He also gave Vishnu the overall responsibility of ensuring that all 
was well with Parvati and the Gods and the sages. 
Realising that Shiva was away, Andhaka thought that this was the opportune 
moment for abducting Parvati. He found that Nandi stood guard at the 
entrance to Shiva's house and began to fight with Nandi. Nandi struck 
Andhaka on the chest with a trident. 
This angered Andhaka and he created a thousand other demons who were 
just like him in appearance. This army of demons defeated Nandi and the 
Gods. Nandi did not know what to do and started to pray to Vishnu. Vishnu 
created some Goddesses from his body and these Goddesses killed the demon 
soldiers. Andhaka also fled. 
After twelve years had passed, Shiva returned and learnt what had transpired. 
By then, Andhaka had recovered and he returned, determined in his bid to 
abduct Parvati. Both Shiva and Vishnu started to fight with Andhaka's army. 
Vishnu told Shiva, "Kill this demon. No one but you can kill Andhaka. Please kill 
the demon and deliver the universe." Shiva pierced Andhaka's chest with a 
trident. He held the trident aloft, with Andhaka transfixed to one of its prongs. 
And with his trident held aloft, Shiva began to dance.But all the evil had 

797 
 



deserted Andhaka's body and mind as soon as he had been pierced by Shiva's 
trident. He started to pray to Shiva. These prayers pleased Shiva. 
He lowered the trident and told Andhaka, "I am pleased with your prayers. My 
companions are known as the ganas. Stay by my side and be a ganapati, that 
is, a Lord over the ganas. You will be Nandi's companion." Bali With Andhaka 
thus taken care of, Prahlada's son Virochana became the king of the demons. 
He ruled his kingdom well. 
There was a sage named Sanatakumara who once went to visit Virochana. 
Virochana was delighted to see the sage and Sanatakumara instructed 
Virochana on the true nature of the universe. These teachings so impressed 
Virochana that he no longer had any desire to be a king. 
He went off to meditate, after having crowned his son, Bali, as the king of the 
demons. 
Bali was a good and righteous king. He ruled well and observed religious rites 
faithfully. But he defeated Indra and the other Gods and won over heaven 
from them. Indra and the other Gods started to pray to Vishnu for 
deliverance. 
The mother of all the Gods was Aditi and she was despondent at seeing her 
children suffer thus. 
She too, started to pray to Vishnu. Stirred by these prayers, Vishnu appeared 
before Aditi. 
"What boon do you desire?" he asked. 
"Please grant me the boon that you will be born as my son." replied Aditi. 
"And as my son, you will take care of Bali." Vishnu granted the boon and was 
born as Aditi's son. As Aditi's son, Vishnu studied the Vedas under the sage 
Bharadvaja. 
Meanwhile, Bali arranged a yajna and Vishnu came to attend the ceremony in 
the form of a dwarf (Vamana). (In more usual accounts, such as the Bhagavata 
Purana, Vishnu was born as a dwarf.) Bali was not going to refuse anything to 

798 
 



anyone on the occasion of the sacrifice. As soon as he saw the dwarf, he 
worshipped him and said, "I am fortunate that you have come to attend my 
ceremony. Please tell me what I can do for you.”  
“Grant me as much of land as can be covered in three of my footsteps," 
replied the dwarf. 
This boon Bali granted. The dwarf immediately assumed a gigantic form. With 
one footstep, Vishnu covered the entire earth. With a second, he covered the 
sky. And with the third and final footstep, he covered heaven. The entire 
universe is inside and egg (anda) and outside the egg there is water. Vishnu's 
foot cracked the shell of the egg and some of the water that was outside, 
poured in. This water began to flow through the sky and became the heavenly 
Ganga. (The story of the heavenly Ganga (identified as the Milky Way) 
descending to earth is a separate story. The story of Ganga being born from 
Vishnu's body is given in the Brahmavaivarta Purana.) Having traversed all the 
land that was available, Vishnu resumed his form of a dwarf. 
"You have now donated to me all the three worlds," he told Bali. "Where will 
you stay?”  
“I seek refuge with you," was Bali's answer. 
Vishnu then instructed Bali to go and live in the underworld. As for heaven, it 
was restored to Indra. 
This is the story of Vishnu's dwarf (Vamana) incarnation. 
Vana Bali had a hundred sons, the eldest among whom was Vana. Vana was 
devoted to Shiva. He was also extremely powerful. He defeated Indra and 
conquered the three worlds. 
Indra and the other Gods went to Shiva. "Your devotee, Vana is oppressing 
us," they told Shiva. 
"Please take care of him." Shiva took up a single arrow and with this, he 
completely burnt up Vana's city. 

799 
 



(This is Deviation from the usual account of the Puranas, such as the Vishnu 
Purana or the Bhagavata Purana. In those accounts, Krishna fought with Vana 
and defeated him, although Shiva fought on Vana's side. It was because of 
Krishna's blessings that Vana became Shiva's companion. Vana's capital was 
named Shonitapura.) When Vana's city was being burnt up, Vana emerged 
and started to pray to Shiva's linga (image of Shiva). Pleased at Vana's prayers, 
Shiva made Vana a ganapati. Thus, Vana came to be Shiva's constant 
companion. 
The Solar Dynasty The sun-God, Vivasvana, was the son of Kashyapa and Aditi. 
He had four wives, Samjna, Rajni, Prabha and Chhaya. 
Samjna's son was Vaivasvata Manu. Rajni's children were Yama, yamuna and 
Revanta. Savarni, Shani, Tapati and Vishti were Chhaya's children and Prabha's 
son was Prabhata. 
(The names do not tally across the Puranas. For example, in the Markandeya 
Purana, the sun had only two wives, Samjna and Chhaya. Yama and Yamuna 
were also the children of Samjna.)Vaivasvata Manu had nine sons. Their 
names were Ikshvaku, Nabhaga, Arishta, Karusha and Prishadhra. Manu also 
had a daughter named Ila, from whom the lunar dynasty originated. 
Ikshvaku's son was Vikukshi and this was the line of Kakutstha. In this line was 
born Rama, of Ramayana fame. 
The names of several kings of the solar dynasty are given. But these we will 
not reproduce, as they are merely a catalogue of names. 
The Lunar Dynasty Budha was the son of the moon-God Chandra. Budha 
married Ila and they had a son named Pururava. 
Pururava married the apsara Urvashi and they had six sons. One of these sons 
was Ayu and amongst Ayu's descendants was a king named Yayati. 
Yayati had two wives. The first was Devayani, daughter of Shukracharya, the 
preceptor of the demons. The second wife was named Sharmishtha and she 
was the daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the danavas. Yayati and Devayani 
had two sons, Yadu and Tursavu. Yayati and Sharmishtha had three sons, 

800 
 



Druhya, Anu and Puru. When it became time for Yayati to retire to the forest, 
he gave puru the bulk of the kingdom and Puru's descendants came to be 
known as the Pauravas. Yadu was given some land towards the south-west 
and his descendants were the Yadavas. Turvasu ruled to the south-east, 
Druhya to the west and Anu to the north. 
One of Yadu's descendants was the king Kritavirya and Kritavirya's son became 
famous as Kartavirya Arjuna. He had a thousand arms and was the most 
skilled of fighters. He eventually met his death at the hands of Parashurama. 
Kartavirya Arjuna had several hundred sons. But the five most important ones 
were Shura, Shurasena, Krishna, Dhrishna and Jayadvaja. Jayadvaja was 
devoted to Vishnu, but his brothers were more inclined towards the worship 
of Shiva. 
The four brothers told Jayadhvaja. "Stop worshipping Vishnu. Our father was a 
devotee of Shiva's and it is our duty to follow the example set by our father. 
Let us worship Shiva.”  
“It is my duty to worship Vishnu," replied Jayadhvaja. "Vishnu is the Lord of 
everything, he is the preserver. How can I do otherwise?" The brothers 
debated about the virtues of worshipping Shiva vis-a-vis Vishnu, but could 
arrive at no consensus. They therefore decided to seek the advice of the seven 
great sages (saptarshi), chief amongst whom was Vashistha. 
Vashishtha told the brothers, "One worships the God that one chooses. There 
are no rules in this regard. All Gods yield the desired fruit, if properly 
worshipped. To the extent that there are rules, there are as follows. Kings 
worship Vishnu and Indra; Brahmanas worship Agni, Aditya, Brahma and 
Shiva; the Gods worship Vishnu; the demons worship Shiva; the yakshas and 
gandharvas worship Chandra; the sages worship Brahma and Shiva; and 
women worship Parvati. But for humans, the best way is to realise that Shiva 
is no different from Vishnu and that Shiva and Vishnu should therefore be 
worshipped simultaneously." The Kurma Purana also gives the names of 

801 
 



several kings belongings to the lunar dynasty. But these we will gloss over, as 
they are merely only a catalogue of names. 
Durjaya and Urvashi There used to be a king named Durjaya. He was learned 
in the shastras and a good king. 
His wife was a beautiful and good woman. 
One day, King Durjaya went to the banks of the river Kalindi. There he met the 
apsara Urvashi and fell in love with her. He married Urvashi and lived with her 
for many years. 
After several years had passed, Durjaya remembered his kingdom and wife. 
He told Urvashi, "Please let me return to my home now.”  
“Not yet, king," replied Urvashi. "Please stay with me for one more year.”  
“I will return as soon as I have visited my kingdom," said Durjaya. "I promise 
you that I will not tarry there. Therefore, let me return.”  
“I will let you go on condition that you do not live as the husband of any other 
woman," replied Urvashi. 
Durjaya agreed to this condition and returned home. But because of the word 
that he had given Urvashi, he stayed away from his wife and did not venture 
near her. His wife tried to find out what the matter was, but Durjaya would 
not reply. Finally, the queen got to know what Durjaya had done and realised 
that her husband had committed a sin. He should not have married Urvashi 
while his wife was still alive. The queen therefore told Durjaya, "You have 
sinned. You must perform penance. That is the sort of action that befits a king, 
not this despondency that you have become addicted to." King Durjaya went 
and met the sage Kanva to ascertain what sort of penance should be 
performed for the sin that he had committed. Kanva advised him to go to the 
Himalayas and meditate. 
While Durjaya was going to the Himalayas, he met a Gandharva king. The 
Gandharva king wore a divine garland, Durjaya remembered Urvashi. He 
thought that the garland was a fitting adornment for no one but Urvashi. He 

802 
 



began to fight with the Gandharva over the possession of the garland. Durjaya 
managed to defeat the Gandharva king and obtain the garland. He 
immediately hastened to banks of the river Kalindi, because he thought that 
he might find Urvashi there. But Urvashi was not to be found, and Durjaya 
roamed the world in search of her.Finally, Durjaya arrived in the region of 
Mount Sumeru. The lake Manasa is located there. And by the shores of the 
lake, Durjaya found Urvashi. He gave the apsara the garland and lived happily 
with her for some time. 
After a few days had passed, Urvashi asked Durjaya, "King please tell me what 
transpired when you went home." Durjaya thereupon told Urvashi about the 
conversation that he had with his wife and about what the sage Kanva had 
asked him to do. 
Urvashi was alarmed when she heard the king's account. "What have you 
done?" she exclaimed. 
"Hasten back, otherwise Kanva and your wife will curse the two of us." But 
Durjaya was so smitten with love for Urvashi that he refused to listen to 
Urvashi's entreaties. 
Urvashi therefore made herself very ugly. This repelled Durjaya, and he gave 
Urvashi up. 
For twelve years Durjaya performed difficult tapasya, living only on fruits and 
roots. For another twelve years, he lived only on air. After having thus 
meditated for twenty-four years, Durjaya went to Kanva's hermitage and told 
the sage all that he had done. 
"I am pleased that you have realised the folly of your ways and have 
performed tapasya," said Kanva. "But that alone is not enough. Your sin has 
been too severe. Go to the city of Varanasi and live there. Shiva is ever-
present in that city and he will pardon all your sins." Durjaya did this and was 
pardoned all his sins. Such are the benefits of praying to Shiva and such are 
the virtues of the wonderful city of Varanasi. 

803 
 



Krishna's Tapasya Krishna was the eight incarnation of Vishnu and he was born 
as the son of Devaki and Vasudeva. 
Initially, Krishna did not have any sons. Desirous of obtaining a son, Krishna 
went to visit the sage Upamanyu. The sage's hermitage was beautiful. 
Wonderous were the trees and flowers and grew there. The constant chanting 
of the Vedas could be heard. Wild animals lost their ferocity as soon as they 
entered the hermitage. Lotus flowers bloomed in the ponds. Sages came from 
all over the country to meditate in the hermitage. The sacred river Ganga 
flowed past the hermitage. 
Krishna greeted the sages and they worshipped him in return. 
Upamanyu welcomed Krishna with various offerings and said, "Our meditation 
has been amply rewarded by your visit. The great Vishnu has himself come to 
grace us by your presence. But is there any particular reason as to why you 
have come to the hermitage?”  
“I wish to meet Shiva," replied Krishna. "How does one get to met him?""Shiva 
appears if a devotee performs difficult tapasya," said Upamanyu. "It helps if 
the meditation is accompanied by great faith." Hearing these words, Krishna 
began a difficult religious rite known as pashupata vrata. He donned clothes 
made out of the barks of trees, smeared ashes on his body and continuously 
chanted Shiva's name. After many years had passed, Shiva and Parvati 
appeared before Krishna. 
"Krishna, why are you performing tapasya?" asked Shiva. "You are the great 
Vishnu himself. 
Any object that you desire is immediately attained. Why are you then engaged 
in this task of meditation?”  
“I wish to have a son who is just like you," said Krishna. "Please let him also be 
devoted to you." Shiva gladly granted the boon and the son who was born was 
Shamba (alternatively, Samba). He was the son of Krishna and Jambavati. 
(Stories about Shamba are to be found in the Vishnu Purana, and also in 
Mahabharataa.) The YUGAS (Eras) You probably remember that there are four 

804 
 



yugas or eras - Satya Yuga or Krita Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali 
Yuga. 
Lomaharshana next told the sages about the characteristics of these four eras. 
Kali Yuga is the worst of the four eras. People are sinful and forget the dharma 
of the four varnas and the four ashramas. In fact, men are so sinful that no 
prescribed penance atones for their sins. 
The only place which is free from such sins is the sacred city of Varanasi. 
In Satya Yuga, the best course to be pursued is meditation; in Treta Yuga it is 
the pursuit of knowledge (jnana); in Dvapara Yuga it is the performance of 
yajnas; and in Kali Yuga it is the donation of alms. Brahma is the primary God 
in Satya Yuga, Surya in Treta Yuga, Vishnu in Dvapara Yuga and Shiva in Kali 
Yuga. 
Envy and jealousy were unknown in Satya Yuga and everyone was happy. 
There was no superiors and inferiors and all individuals were equally healthy 
and equally handsome. There were no fixed places for people to live in, no 
cities and no villages. Men lived in the mountains and on the shores of the 
oceans. 
In Satya Yuga, water was always freely available. This was no longer the case 
in Treta Yuga. 
Water only became available when it rained. Rain was unknown earlier. And 
as it rained, trees began to grow. People lived on these trees. The fruit from 
these trees provided the sustenance required to make a living. But gradually, 
anger and jealousy came to be known and many of the wonderful trees 
disappeared as mankind picked up evils ways. However, enough trees were 
left to ensure that people did not die of starvation. They lived on honey 
gathered from the trees. 
Although men looked on Satya Yuga with nostalgia, ill-health and disease 
continued to be unknown even in Treta Yuga. But towards the end of Treta 
Yuga, people became really sinful. 

805 
 



All the trees disappeared. To make a living, mankind had to resort to 
agriculture and animal husbandry. The weather became inclement and 
seasons like summer, monsoon and winter led to hardship. Notions of 
property were also introduced. Individuals appropriated mountains, rivers, 
land, trees and herbs as their own. To instil righteousness in the minds of 
people, the principles of varna ashrama dharma were set out towards the end 
of Treta Yuga. 
In Dvapara Yuga, hatred, anger and jealousy became much more common. 
Fighting started. It was then that Veda Vyasa spread amongst ordinary people, 
the knowledge that was in the Vedas, by dividing them. Drought, death and 
disease came to be known in Dvapara Yuga. 
In Kali Yuga, fraudulence is the norm. There are severe droughts and famines. 
Revolutions take place. 
People are liars and sinners. They are easily angered. They d not respect the 
Brahmanas. The Brahmanas, on their part, forget all about the Vedas and 
yajnas. Shudras become kings and oppress the Brahmanas. Some Shudras 
shave off their heads and wear saffron clothes. They pretend to be religious 
teachers. And horror of horrors, people start to believe in these fraudulent 
teachers. Women wear hairpins in their hair. As if this alone were not enough, 
they refuse to obey their husbands. Thieves are everywhere. The only 
redeeming feature of Kali Yuga is the fact that even if one worships Shiva just 
a little bit in Kali Yuga, one attains undying punya (store of merit). 
Lingas A linga is an image of Shiva. There are several wonderful lingas in the 
wonderful city of Varanasi. 
There is a gigantic linga named Omkara. Amongst other famous lingas located 
in the city are Krittivaseshvara, Madhyadeshvara, Vishveshvara and 
Kaparddishvara. 
The Kurma Purana recites the glories of these lingas. It also enumerates the 
various tirthas (places of pilgrimage) that are to be found in the city of 
Varanasi. 

806 
 



It goes on to list the virtues of the Ganga, the Yamuna and the city of Prayaga 
(modern Allahabad). 
Geography and Astronomy It is hoped that you have not forgotten that 
Svayambhuva Manu had a son named Priyavrata. 
Priyavrata had ten sons. Their names were Agnidhra, Agnivahu, Vapushmana, 
Dyutimana, Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya, Savana, Putra and Jyotishmana. 
Medha, Agnivahu and Putra had no desire to rule. They were not interested in 
material pursuits and became hermits. 
Priyavrata divided the earth amongst the remaining seven sons. Thus it was 
that the earth came to be divided into seven regions or dvipas. The names of 
these regions are Jambudvipa, Plakshadvipa, Shalmalidvipa, Kushadvipa, 
Krounchjdvipa, Shakadvipa and Pushkaradvipa. 
Agnidhra ruled over Jambudvipa, Medhatithi over Plakshadvipa, Vapushmana 
over Shalmalidvipa, Jyotishmana over Kushadvipa, Dyutimana over 
Krounchadvipa, Bhavya over Shakadvipa and Savan over Pushkaradvipa. 
Agnidhra, the ruler of Jambudvipa, had nine sons. Their names were Nabhi 
KimPurusha, Hari, Ilavrita, Ramaya, Hiranyavana, Kuru, Bhadrashva and 
Ketumala. Agnidhra divided Jambudvipa into nine regions (varshas) and gave 
each of his sons a region to rule over. A king named Bharataa was one of 
Nabhi's descendants. After the name of Bharataa, the region that Nabhi ruled 
over has come to be known as Bharataavarsha. 
There are fourteen regions (lokas) in the universe. Seven of them form the 
upper regions. Their names are bhuloka, bhuvarloka, svarloka, maharloka, 
janaloka, tapolaka and satyaloka. Bhuloka is the earth and its limits extend 
upto the points that can be lit up the rays of the sun and the moon. Take the 
distance from bhuloka to the solar circle. An equal distance beyond the solar 
circle constitutes bhuvarloka. The region from the limits of bhuvarloka to the 
region of Dhruva (the Pole Star) is svarloka or svarga (heaven). Above the solar 
circle is the lunar circle and above that come, successively, the regions of the 
stars (nakshatras), Budha (Mercury), Shukra (Venus), Mangala (Mars), 

807 
 



Brihaspati (Jupiter), the saptarshis' (the constellation Ursa Majoris or the 
Great Bear) and Dhruva. 
Shani (Saturn), Brihaspati and Mangala move slowly. The sun, the moon, 
Budha and Shukra move relatively fast. The sun's chariot is drawn by seven 
horses named Gayatri, Vrihati, Ushnika, Jagati, Pamki, Anushtupa and 
Trishtupa. In each month, the sun adopts a specific form known as an aditya. 
There are thus twelve adityas - Dhatta, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Shakru, 
Vivasvana, Pusha, Parjanya, Amshu, Bhaga, Tvashta and Vishnu. 
Maharloka is above the world of Dhruva (Dhruvaloka). It is reserved for those 
who have been freed from the bonds of the world. Janaloka is still further 
away. Brahma's sons live there. 
Tapaloka is beyond janaloka and satyaloka is beyond tapaloka. Another word 
for satyaloka is Brahmaloka, since Brahma lives there. Vishnu lives there as 
well. 
(The Kurma Purana does not mention the seven lokas that constitute the 
lower regions of the universe. This is the underworld (patala).) There are 
seven seas that surround the seven dvipas on earth. The names of the seas 
are Kshara, Ikshu, Sura, Ghrita, Dadhi, Kshira and Svadu. (The names of the 
seven oceans often differ from Purana to Purana.) Right in the center of 
Jambudvipa is Mount Sumeru. To its south lie the mountains Himavana, 
Hemakuta and Nishadha; and to its north the mountains Nila, Shveta and 
Sringi. Bharataavarsha is to the south of Mount Sumeru. Brahma's assembly is 
located on the peak of Mount Sumeru. 
Manvantaras You already know what a manvantara is. The titles of the seven 
great sages (saptarshi), the names of the Gods and the title of Indra change 
from the manvantara to another.In the present kalpa (cycle), six manvantaras 
have passed. 
The first Manu was Svayambhuva. 

808 
 



The second Manu was Svarochisha. The Gods then were the paravatas and 
tushitas and the title of Indra was held by Vipashchita. The seven great sages 
were Urjja, Stamba, prana, Dambholi, Vrishabha, Timira and Arvarivana. 
Uttama was the third Manu. The Gods of this manvantara were the sudhamas, 
stayas, shivas, pratardanas and vashavartis and the name of the Indra was 
Sushanti. Rajah, Gotra, Urddhavahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapa and Shukra were 
the seven great sages. 
The fourth Manu was Tamasa. The Gods of this era were the suravas, haris, 
satyas and sudhas and the title of Indra was held by Shibi. The seven great 
sages were Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, Varuna and Pivara. 
In the fifth manvantara, the Manu was Raivata and the title of Indra was held 
by Vibhu. The Gods were the bhutis and the vaikunthas and the seven great 
sages were Hiranyaroma, VedaSri, Urddhavahu, Vedavahu, Suvahu and 
Suparjanya. (The name of the seventh great sage is missing.) The Manus 
Svarochisha, Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata were all descended from 
Svayambhuva Manu. 
The sixth Manu was Chakshusha and the Indra then was Manojava. The Gods 
were known as the adyas, prasutas, bhaVyasa, prithukas and lekhas. 
Sumedha, Vrija, Havishmana, Uttama, Madhu, Abhimana and Sahishnu were 
the seven great sages. 
The seventh manvantara is the one that is now current and the Indra now is 
Purundara. The Manu is Shradhadeva, the Gods are the adityas, the vasus, the 
rudras and the maruts. The names of the seven great sages are Vashishtha, 
Kashyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Goutama, Vishvamitra and Bharadvaja. 
In the present kalpa, there will be seven more manvantaras in the future. 
Thereafter, the world will be destroyed. 
(It should be mentioned that the names given in this section do not 
necessarily tally with the names given in the other Puranas. Not only do the 
names of the Gods, the sages and the Indras differ, the names of the future 
manvantaras also sometimes differ from Purana to Purana.) Veda Vyasa In 

809 
 



every Dvapara Yuga, a Veda Vyasa is born so as to divide the Vedas and 
disseminate their knowledge. In the present era, there have been twenty-
eight Dvapara Yugas and there have therefore been twenty-eight individuals 
who have held the title of Veda Vyasa. The Kurma Purana gives their names as 
follows.(1) Svayambhuva Manu. 
(2) Prajapati. 
(3) Ushana. 
(4) Brihaspati. 
(5) Savita. 
(6) Mrityu. 
(7) Indra. 
(8) Vashishtha. 
(9) Sarasvata. 
(10) Tridhama. 
(11) Rishabha. 
(12) Suteja. 
(13) Dharma. 
(14) Sachakshu. 
(15) Trayaruni. 
(16) Dhananjaya. 
(17) Kritanjaya. 
(18) Ritanjaya. 
(19) Bharadvaja. 
(20) Goutama. 
(21) Vachashrava. 
(22) Narayana. 

810 
 



(23) Trinavindu. 
(24) Valmiki. 
(25) Shaktri. 
(26) Parashara. 
(27) Jatukarna. 
(28) Krishna Dvaipayana. 
Krishna Dvaipayana Veda Vyasa divided the Vedas into four parts and taught 
them to four of his disciples. He taught Paila the Rig Veda. Vaishampayana the 
Yajur Veda, Jaimini the Sama Veda and Sumantu the Atharva Veda. As for the 
Puranas, they were taught to Lomaharshana. 
Shiva's Incarnations Most Puranas only mention Vishnu's incarnations 
(avataras). The Kurma Purana is one of the great ones which mentions Shiva's 
incarnations. 
In each Kali Yuga, Shiva has had an incarnation. The names of these 
incarnations are as follows. 
(1) Shveta. 
(2) Sutara. 
(3) Madana. 
(4) Suhotra. 
(5) Kankana. 
(6) Lokakshi. 
(7) Jaigishavya. 
(8) Dadhivaha. 
(9) Rishabha. 
(10) Bhrigu. 
(11) Ugra. 

811 
 



(12) Atri. 
(13) Bali. 
(14) Goutama. 
(15) Vedashirsha. 
(16) Gokarna. 
(17) Shikhandaka. 
(18) Jatamali. 
(19) Attahasa. 
(20) Daruka. 
(21) Langali. 
(22) Mahavama. 
(23) Muni. 
(24) Shuli. 
(25) Pindamunishvara. 
(26) Sahishnu. 
(27) Somasharma. 
(28) Nakulishvara. 
The Ishvara Gita While Lomaharshana was reciting the Kurma Purana to the 
assembled sages, Krishna Dvaipayana Veda Vyasa arrived on the scene. 
Lomaharshana and the other sages requested Veda Vyasa to instruct them 
about the path to true knowledge. This is what Veda Vyasa told them. 
The Paramatman (the divine soul) is the only truth. It is ever pure and ever 
present. It is from the Paramatman that the universe is created and it is into 
the Paramatman that the universe merges at the time of its destruction. The 
Paramatman is not the earth. It is not water, energy, wind or sky. 
It cannot be touched, nor can it be sensed. 

812 
 



The Paramatman is always present in the jivatman (human soul). Any sense of 
distinction between the Paramatman and the jivatman is due to illusions and 
the presence of the ego. The truly learned rise above such illusions. Therefore, 
a wise person does not see any distinction between his own self and other 
objects. The same Paramatman pervades everything. Just as all rivers unite 
with the ocean, a learned person realises that all individuals jivatmans unite 
with the Paramatman. 
Yoga (literally, union) is a technique of meditation that helps to bring about 
this sense of identity between the jivatman and the Paramatman. Yoga has 
eight components. The first is Pranayama. 
This means the control of one's breath. The breath of life is known as prana 
and ayama means control. There are three parts to any Pranayama exercise. 
When the breath is being exhaled, that is known as rechaka; and the process 
of inhalation is known as puraka. When the breath is neither being inhaled nor 
exhaled, that is kumbhaka. 
The second component of yoga is pratyahara. This connotes the control of 
one's senses. Yoga must always be performed in a proper posture and this is 
the third component of asana. The fourth component is called yama. This 
means the practice of non-violence, truthfulness and pity. 
The fifth component is known as niyama. This encompasses worship, studying 
the Vedas, cleanliness and meditation. 
Yoga has a sixth component named dhyana. In this process, one conjures up 
an image of the Paramatman and meditates continuously on it. The process of 
fixing this image in one's heart is the seventh component, dharana. And the 
final component, samadhi, is a situation where the individual realises the 
complete identity between the jivatman and the Paramatman. 
Rituals The sacred thread (upavita) ceremony is very important and must 
always be performed at eight year of age. Brahma had created the cotton tree 
so that sacred threads might be made out of cotton. But on occasions it is 
permissible to make sacred threads out of grass. 

813 
 



A guru (teacher) is always to be respected and worshipped. In principle, a guru 
is anyone from whom knowledge might be gained. But apart from usual 
teachers, a father-in-law, a grandfather and an individual belonging to a 
superior varna are also recognised as gurus. A mother, a grandmother, a 
guru's wife, an aunt, a mother-in-law and the wife of an elder brother are 
recognised as being equivalent to a guru. One must never show a guru 
disrespect or argued with. 
A person who hates his guru is certain to go to hell. 
Amongst gurus or those who are equivalent to gurus, the most important are 
a father, a mother, a teacher, an elder brother and a husband. These have to 
be respectfully served at all costs. 
A Brahmana must always wash his mouth after eating, drinking, sleeping, 
bathing, spitting or changing clothes. The mouth must also be washed before 
sitting down to study. It is also recommended that the mouth be washed after 
talking to those who do not believe in the Vedas, shudras, outcasts and 
women. If a mouthwash is not possible, one can cleanse oneself by touching a 
piece of clothing is touched inadvertently, the act of purification requires the 
touching of water, wet grass or the earth. 
One of the most sacred mantras (incantations) that one can chant is the 
gayatri. Before chanting, thirty-two-cells must be drawn, as shown, and the 
letters of the mantra must be written down in the cells, as indicated. To recite 
the gayatri, one now reads the letters as they occur in the numbered cells. 
That is, one starts with cell number one, moves to cell number two and so on 
and so forth. 
  5    13    21    29    28    20    12    4  
rwa  sya  pra   se    ja    nah    va    tu 
  6    14    22    30    27    19    11    3  
 re   dhi  cho   sa     ra     yo     de   vi  
  7    15    23    31    26    18    10    2 
 ni    ma   da    va     ro     yo    rgo  tsa  
  8    16    24    32    25    17      9    1  

814 
 



yam  hi  yat   dom   pa   dhi    bha  ta  
A person who kills a Brahmana, drinks wine, or steals gold from a Brahmana, 
has to perform penance by killing himself. A person who kills a Brahmana may 
also build a hut in the forest and live there for a period of twelve years. But 
throughout the period, he has to bear a mark signifying the dead Brahmana's 
head on his palm. He is also not permitted to visit another Brahmana or a 
temple as long as the penance is going on. It needs to be mentioned that the 
sin of killing a Brahmana can be thus pardoned only if the killing was done 
inadvertently. If the killing was conscious, no penance will suffice. Under such 
circumstances, the sinner had best immolate himself in a fire, drown himself, 
or fast to death. 
For other sins, the observance of a religious rite (vrata) is often indicated. The 
major vratas are as follows. 
(i) Santapana: This involves living for one whole day on cow's urine, cowdung, 
cow's milk, curds made from cow's milk and clarified butter made from cow's 
milk. The next day is a day of fasting. 
(ii) Mahasantapana: This is a more severe version of the earlier vrata. In the 
case of santapana vrata, five items were listed as permissible food. 
Mahasantapana vrata lasts for a period of six days, and on each of these days, 
only one of the five items mentioned may be partaken of. The seventh day is 
day of fasting. 
(iii) Prajapatya or krichha: If this vrata is to be observed, one can eat only 
during the day. For the first three days, one is only permitted to eat twenty-six 
handfuls of food, each handful being as large as a hen's egg. 
For the next three days, twenty-two handfuls are permitted, but only in the 
evenings. And for the final three days, twenty-four handfuls are permitted. 
(iv) Atikrichha: This is a more severe version of the earlier vrata. For the first 
three days, a single handful of food is permitted during the day. For the next 
three days, one handful is permitted in the evenings. One handfuls of food, 
each handful being as large as a hen's egg. For the next three days, twenty-

815 
 



two handfuls are permitted, but only in the evenings. And for the final three 
days, three-four handfuls are permitted. 
(v) Paraka: Twelve continuous days of fasting are required for this. 
(vi) Taptakrichha: This vrata lasts for a period of twelve days, during which 
time one is permitted to bathe only once a day. For the first three days one 
drinks only water; for the next three days one lives on milk; one has to live on 
clarified butter for the ensuing three days are days of fasting. 
(vii) Krichhatikrichha: If one is to observe this vrata, one has to live only on 
milk for the space of twenty-one days. 
(viii) Padakrichha: This vrata lasts for four days. For the first day one eats only 
one meal; the second day is a day of fasting; on the third day one can eat as 
much as one wants; and on the fourth and final day, one fasts. 
(ix) Chandrayana: This vrata lasts for an entire month and begins on the day 
of the full moon (purnima). On the first day, fifteen handfuls are to be eaten. 
Thereafter, one handfuls less is eaten on successive days, until on the day of 
new moon (amavasya), one fasts completely. On each day that follows, the 
amount of food eaten is increased by one handful. Finally, on the day of the 
next full moon, fifteen handfuls of food are eaten and the vrata is completed. 
As mentioned earlier, those who kill Brahmanas, steal their gold, or drink 
wine, are sinners. Also sinners are those who associate with these 
aforementioned sinners for more than one year. Those who associate with 
outcasts for more than a year are also sinners. 
A Brahmana who drinks wine should drink boiling wine as a penance. It is also 
permitted to drink cow's urine as atonement. A person who steals gold from 
Brahmanas will go to the king and confess his guilt. His penance will be 
completed when the king beats him to death with a club. The only exception is 
a case where the thief himself happens to be a Brahmana. He can then 
perform penance by meditating. It is always a king's duty to punish sinners. If 
the king fails in this task, the sins vest with the king. 

816 
 



A person who associates with sinners has to observe taptakrichha vrata for 
one year. A man who takes on outcast for a wife has to observe taptakrichha 
or santapana. A Brahmana who kills a kshatriya is required to observe 
prajapatya, santapana or taptakrichha for one year. In case the victim is a 
vaishya, krichhatikrichha or chandrayana are indicated. If a shudra is killed, 
five hundred cows have to be donated. If an elephant is killed, taptakrichha 
vrata has to be observed. 
Chandrayana will suffice if a cow is killed inadvertently. But if a cow is 
consciously killed, there is no penance that is adequate. 
For minor thefts, the stolen goods have to be returned to the rightful owner 
and santapana observed. But if a Brahmana steals foodgrains, he has to 
observe prajapatya for an entire year. A cannibal can purity himself through 
chandrayana vrata. A person who eats the meat of a crow, dog or elephant, 
has to observe taptakrichha. Santapana is for those who happen to eat 
mongooses, owls or cats. An eater of camels or donkeys observes 
taptakrichha.A Brahmana who becomes an atheist can cleanse himself 
through prajapatya. If he revolts against the Gods or against his guru, the act 
of purification involves taptakrichha. A Brahmana who recites the Puranas to 
outcasts has to observe chandrayana. 
There are several other forms of penance that are catalogued by the Kurma 
Purana. 
The Sita who was an Illusion It is certain that you know the story of the 
Ramayana and you therefore also known that Ravana, the king of Lanka, 
abducted Sita, Rama's wife. But you certainly do not know the story of the Sita 
who was an illusion (maya Sita). 
This story clearly illustrates that no harm can come to a person who is 
righteous. 
Ravana disguised himself as a hermit and came to abduct Sita. But Sita got to 
know of Ravana's plan and was determined to foil it. She therefore began to 
pray to Agni, the God of fire. 

817 
 



Thus stirred by Sita's prayers, Agni appeared and produced a Sita who was 
really an illusion. 
This maya sita he left in the real Sita's place. As for the real Sita, she was 
absorbed into the fire. 
Without realising the substitutions, Ravana abducted the illusory Sita and the 
entire war was fought over a Sita who was not even real. 
When Rama triumphed over Ravana and recovered Sita, a test by fire (agni 
pariksha) was held. 
In the process, the Sita who was an illusion was returned to the fire and the 
real Sita emerged once again. Thus the real Sita was never tainted by Ravana's 
touch. 
(The story of the Sita who was an illusion is also given in the Brahmavaivarta 
Purana). 
Shiva and Brahma Many years ago, Brahma lost his head slightly. He began to 
imagine that he was superior to Shiva and Vishnu. He told all the sages, "I am 
the supreme Godhead. There is no one else but me." While Brahma was thus 
instructing the sages, Vishnu arrived and was enraged at Brahma's behaviour. 
"You are indeed ignorant," he told Brahma. "I am the supreme Godhead. You 
are only the creator. But I am, after all, the preserver." While Vishnu and 
Brahma were thus arguing the four Vedas adopted animate forms and 
appeared before them. Each of the Vedas tried to persuade Brahma and 
Vishnu that Shiva was superior to both of them. Vishnu was persuaded by this 
reasoning, but Brahma was not. 
He told the Vedas, "You must be joking. How can Shiva be superior to the two 
of us? He is always wandering around with ghosts and demons for 
companions."While all this was going on, who should arrive but Shiva? 
Brahma promptly proceeded to insult Shiva. Shiva then created a being 
named Kalabhairava from his own body and Kalabhairava started to fight with 
Brahma. In those days, Brahma used to have five heads. In course of the 
fighting, Kalabhairava chopped off one of Brahma's heads. Ever since that day, 

818 
 



Brahma has had four heads and four faces. (In many other Puranas, there is no 
mention of Kalabhairava. Shiva performed the chopping off himself). 
Brahma died as soon as his head had been cut off. Shiva did manage to revive 
him. But the mere fact that Shiva had killed Brahma, meant that Shiva and 
committed the sin of killing Brahma, a Brahmana. As a result of this sin, 
Brahma's severed head got stuck to Kalabhairava's palm and would not be 
dislodged. (In accounts where Shiva was himself responsible for the killing, the 
severed head adhered to Shiva's palm). 
Kalabhairava roamed around the world and the head accompanied him on his 
travels. For a thousand years of the Gods, Kalabhairava continued to travel. 
Eventually, Vishnu advised Kalabhairava to go to the sacred city of Varanasi. 
As soon as Kalabhairava arrived at the city of Varanasi, the head (kapala) got 
dislodged (mochana). A tirtha is a place of pilgrimage. The exact spot where 
this wonderful happening took place is accordingly known as Kapalamochana 
tirtha. 
There are many other tirthas that the Kurma Purana describes. Among these 
are Prayaga, Kurukshetra, Gaya and Madhuvana (Mathura), The glories of the 
river Narmada are also described. The waters of the river Sarasvati purify a 
sinner after three days of bathing, while the waters of the river Yamuna takes 
an entire week. The mere touch of a drop of water from the river Ganga 
purifies a sinner. But as for the river Narmada, the sight of the waters alone is 
enough. 
Nandi There used to be a sage named Shilada. He was righteous and learned 
in the shastras. To obtain a son, Shilada began to pray to Shiva. The tapasya 
went on for a thousand years and Shiva appeared before Shilada. 
"I am pleased with your meditation." said Shiva, "what boon do you desire?”  
“Please grant me the boon that I may obtain a son who will not be born from 
a mother. " replied Shilada, "And my son should be immortal." Shiva granted 
the desired boon.When Shilada was ploughing the land, a handsome boy 

819 
 



suddenly appeared on the top of his plough. The four directions shone with 
the boy's radiance and the boy began to address Shilada as "father". 
The son studied the shastras and became learned. He was given the name of 
Nandi. Nandi wished to see Shiva and he also wished to become immortal. He 
therefore went to the shores of the ocean and started to pray to Shiva. He 
chanted the required mantra one crore times. 
When Shiva appeared and wished to grant a boon. Nandi said. "Please grant 
me enough of life so that I can chant the mantra one crore times more." Shiva 
appeared once again, and Nandi desired the same boon. 
When this had happened three times. Shiva said, "Enough is enough. There is 
no need for any more chanting of incantations. I make you immortal. I also 
make you a ganapati, Lord over the ganas. You will be my constant 
companion." The place where Nandi chanted the incantation has become 
famous as Japyeshvara Tirtha. 
The maruts had a daughter named Suyasha. Shiva himself arranged that Nandi 
should be married to Suyasha. 
Epilogue: Vishnu completed his recital of the Kurma Purana and the sages 
saluted him. They sung his praise. The Kurma Purana is most sacred. A person 
who reads it attains Brahmaloka. A person who reads only one chapter of the 
text is forgiven all his sins. Undying punya is attained by an individual who 
donates this Purana to Brahmanas in the months of Vaishakha or Kartika. 
Particularly sacred is the part that is known as the Brahmi Samhita. 
But the text should never be read or recited in the presence of shudras. A 
person who ignores this injunction will surely go to hell. There is also a similar 
injunction about reciting the text to those who are disbelievers (that is, those 
who do not believe in the Vedas), a person who violates this injunction will be 
born as a dog in his next life. 
Home   
  

820 
 



10. BHAGAVAT PURANA  
CHAPTER FIRST  
OBESISANCE TO THE SUPREME BEING  
We meditate to that Paramatma (Supreme Being) who is the eternal truth; 
and who creates the universe, holds it and causes Pralaya. He is the light 
independence and from of knowledge in himself. He causes illusions even for 
the most knowledgeous ones. Yet, He is far beyond all the illusions.In Srimad 
Bhagavat, created by the great sage Vyasa, There is a description of the 
supreme religion, which is free from desire. There is also a description of 
Paramatmatatva (the metaphysical entity) that every pious people with holy 
spirit must know about. Srimad Bhagavat is a delicious and relishing fruit of 
Vedas. Because of a touch of Sri Shukacharya's lips, it is impregnated with 
blissful nectar. So, as long as there is life in his body, a devotee keeps on 
relishing this nectar of divine scripture. It is easily available right here on the 
earth itself. 
PERFORMANCE OF JNANA-YAGYA  
In the beginning of the Kali Yuga, sages like Shaunak et al organized a vast 
Jnana Yagya in the holy region of the Naimisharanya. The purpose of the 
yagya was the benefit of the common people and it was to last for a 
millennium. To quench the spiritual curiosity of the sages, Suta, the orator of 
Puranas, also arrived there. Felicitating him, the sages asked Suta, " O great 
sage, by the grace of Vyasa, you have learned all the Puranas, history, religion 
etc. You also know about all the other subjects as well. So kindly narrate the 
tale which could surely benefit the common people so that they too can 
experience the real spiritual joy." Pleased by the curiosity of the sages, Suta 
said, " O great sages, it is extremely auspicious to talk about Lord Krishna. Only 
by discussing about the God, can the mind of the people be freed from 
illusions. Love then begins to emerge in it for God and it begins to detach itself 
from physical comfort and experience the blissful joy. 
LORD VISHNU - THE SOURCE OF WHOLE CREATION  

821 
 



Driven by the desire, the Adi Purusha (primitive being) Narayan took the help 
of his Prakriti (nature's female creational force) and generated himself in 
Chaturbhuj (four-armed) from. And from His navel appeared Lord Brahma, the 
creator. That form of God was full of pure truth and from the parts of His 
body, all the Lokas (worlds) got extension. Metaphysicists saw the God with 
innumerable heads, eyes, arms and legs. That endless, eternal Supreme Being 
was the source of all the Avatars (incarnations) and from the parts of His body 
was created Gods, human beings, birds animals and all other creatures. 
From the ages, twenty-four incarnations of that Supreme being, like Sanakadi 
Kumar, Varaha, Narada, Nar-Narayana, Kapila, Dattatreya, Rishabhdev, Prithu, 
Matsya, Kachchhap, Dhanvantari, Mohini, Narasinha, Vamana, Parshurama, 
Vyasa, Sri Rama, Balarama, Krishna and Buddha have appeared to guard the 
people and to remove the burden from the earth, and to save their devotees 
and gentlemen. Suta says, " Blessed are those who have unconditional love for 
Lord Vasudev, the Lord of the universe. Such people don't fall again and again, 
in the cycles of life and death. Bhagavat Mahapurana is such a scripture in 
which the great sage Veda Vyasa describes the holy and pious tales of the 
God. For the benefit of the people, Veda Vyasa compiled this great scripture 
taking extracts of all the Vedas, and other ancient treatises. 
Reading, hearing or reflecting on which, the human being inclines to devotion 
and finds salvation.Shaunk asked, " When that tale was compiled in scriptural 
form, that was later on related by Shukadeva. Where was it created? For what 
purpose and by whose inspiration, that scripture was compiled and how did 
Shukadeva, who was congenital wandered, came to study this scripture, and 
how he came to see the king Parikshit? What discussion took place between 
them?" What Suta narrated to the sages, forms the main body of the great 
scripture Srimad Bhagavat.-  
 
VEDA VYASA - THE PARTIAL INCARNATION  

822 
 



Veda Vyasa had appeared in Dwapar Yuga. He was the son of Maharshi 
Parashar and Satyawati then known as Matsyagandha. Vyasa was a partial 
incarnation of the God. Veda Vyasa effected a division of Vedas, created 
Puranas conceptualized history (Mahabharataa-which was actually jotted 
down by none other than Lord Ganesha.) He also established different 
faculties for teaching his disciples. Yet staying in his hermitage at the banks of 
the river Saraswati, he was not satisfied with his performance. Something was 
still writhing within his heart to come out. So he was feelling upset and was 
unable to find a reason for his dejection. Just then, Devarshi Narada arrived 
there, and saw that Mahatma Vyasa was upset. As nothing was concealed 
from Narada, he told him the reasons for his moroseness. 
Narada told him that though he had created great epics, yet all of them lack a 
devotional description of God. That was why his soul was still writhing. Narada 
also suggested him to describe the glory of Hari, or neither his voice, nor his 
creation would ever get pure. Devarshi Narada then narrated the tale of God 
and the glory of His devotees to Vyasa and said, "O great soul, look at the 
effect of devotion and company of the pious people that I have become 
Devarshi from an ordinary son of a maid" After the departure of Narada, 
Vyasa sat in meditation and experienced the illusion that caught the life. He 
also experienced devotion. Thus, his fresh experience led Veda Vyasa to 
create this great scripture. The virtues of God had such a strong attraction 
that, lured by them, even selfindulgent Shukdevi ran back from the jungles to 
his father and prayed to let him read that scripture. 
Because of their link with Lord Sri Krishna, Suta narrates the stories of 
Pandavas, their heavenly departure, coronation of Parikshit, his all round 
victories etc. as per their sequences in Mahabharata. He also narrates the 
episodes of Ashwatthama the son of Guru Drona, worship of God by Kunti etc. 
and migration of Lord Krishna to Dwaraka. 
KING PARIKSHIT ENCOUNTERS KALI YUGA  
During his regime, the king Parikshit got untoward reports that Kali Yuga had 
entered within the limits of his otherwise peaceful kingdom. With a huge 

823 
 



army, Parikshit at once setout to the spot where Kali Yuga had arrived. On the 
way he saw the religion and the earth in the guises of a bull and a cow 
respectively. The cow was in death-like condition, while the bull was somehow 
dragging himself on one leg only as its three legs were broken. He also saw 
that a king-like, but impolite man was beating them ruthlessly with a stick. 
From a distance, the king Parikshit shouted at the man, "You scoundrel, why 
are you beating such helpless creatures in my kingdom?" Saying this, the king 
Parikshit drew his sword to kill the evil Kali. But the clever Kali fell at the feet 
of the king. For Kali was now in the king's refuge, he did not kill him, but 
ordered that being an assistant of irreligious, he should at once leave the 
kingdom. Kali then asked, " O king wherever I go, I find you ready to kill me 
with you bow and arrow. You tell me where should I go and where should I 
live?" The king allowed Kali to live in five things-- gambling, drinking of wine, 
company of women, violence and the gold. Since then, Kali i.e. the dispute has 
had a continuous association with these five things. Hence, anybody disirous 
of selfimprovement must avoid these five things which are governed by Kali. 
KING PARIKSHIT DISHONORS SAGE SHAMIK  
One day, king Parikshit went on a hunting excursion. Till noon, he could not 
find a game. He was feeling restless because of hunger, thirst and fatigue. 
Searching water and shelter the king reached the hermitage of the sage 
Shamik. Shamik was in deep meditation so he did not welcome the king. For 
the first time the king Parikshit grew angry with a Brahmin. As a revenge and 
to show his anger he hanged a dead snake around the sage's neck. 
Maharshi Shamik's son Sringi was also an effluent person. When he came to 
know about his father's insult by the king Parikshit, he cursed him that on the 
seventh day from that moment, Takshak, the Naga would bite the king for his 
violation of kingly glory. There in the capital, king Parikshit realized his mistake 
and felt sorry for his deed. But he welcomed the curse. 
Transferring the kingdom to his son Janamejay, king Parikshit reached the 
banks of the river Ganges and sat there on a fast unto death. Very soon all the 

824 
 



great sages and kings began to throng there. King Parikshit welcomed them 
and begged them to recite the plays of God for him. 
He also asked what a creature ought to do always, and what were the duties 
of those who face an imminent death. 
SHUKHADEVA'S ARRIVAL  
At that moment the ever-wandering, indifferent-natured sage Shukadeva also 
arrived there. He was self indulgent and free from the bondages of ashramas 
(phases of life). He was then only sixteen years old but appeared quite radiant 
and graceful. 
Shukadeva was an honorable figure even for the sages who had gathered 
there as gust themselves. King Parikshit formally welcomed and worshiped 
Shukadeva and offered him a comfortable seat. King Parikshit then prayed to 
him, " O sage, Lord Krishna is definitely pleased with me. That's why He has 
sent a great sage like you to save a wretched person like me. So, O Mahatma 
(the great soul), kindly remove my doubts and guide me regarding the duties 
of a human-being? What should one acquire and what should one drop?"  
 
SECOND CHAPTER  
Sri Shukadeva says 'O King, ordinary people literally waste their lives in petty 
matters like useless discussions, worry, sleep and feeding themselves. Those 
who wish to conquer their fears, O Parikshit, must listen to, recite and 
remember the tales that depict the plays of Lord Sri Krishna. The human birth 
can be successful only if by any means one has a remembrance of God in his 
last moments. All the scriptures also dictate the same doctrine. 
One should remember the huge, macro as well as micro form of the 
omnipresent God, and must not long for the physical objects. Shukadeva then 
revealed the kinds of Mukti (salvation) as told in Vedas and said: 'O King, there 
is no other way as beneficial as the means to achieve the affectionate 
devotion of Lord Vasudev. Hence, every human being must in all 

825 
 



circumstances, use his might in listening to, reciting and remembering the 
name of Lord Sri Hari. 
Though as per the interest, nature, and the desires of different people, and 
pleased by their worship, many Gods oblige their devotees within their 
powers. But materialization of mundane desires of the innocent people has 
disastrous consequences. Learned people, therefore, whether they have or 
haven't any desire, worship Purushaottam God with fervent devotion. 
CREATION OF THE WORLD  
The king Parikshit felt extreme pleasure when Shukadeva satisfied his queries. 
He then began to feel submerged in the stream of Bhagavat Katha (tale of the 
God). His selfish worries regarding his own benefits existed no more. He 
insisted again: O Brahmin, now kindly explain how does the God create the 
universe out of illusions. How does He preserve the universe? How does He 
destroy it? At the instance of the king, Shukadeva contemplated on the God 
and presented the dialogue of Brahma and Narada that illustrates the 
Maitreya nature of the creation. 
Brahma had preached Narada that because of Paramatma's (Supreme Being) 
desire of creation, this universe into existence from the primitive elements. 
Lord Brahma also told that after creating the universe God himself entered it. 
Hence, the whole universe is a manifestation of God's infinite appearance. His 
virtues can not be counted. But, to show his presence, Narayan takes various 
incarnations and appears on earth time and again. Merely, by listening to 
various beautiful and enticing plays of God, the mind, voice, thoughts and the 
soul of a human being become holy. 
Parikshit again put forth many new queries regarding creation. Shukadeva 
related the events like emergence of Brahamji on a lotus that cropped up 
from the navel of Lord Vishnu, sighting of Lord Vishnu's abode by Lord 
Brahma, preaching of Bhagavat to Lord Brahma by Lord Vishnu and 
Dashlakshan (ten characteristics) of Bhagavat etc. 
 

826 
 



THIRD CHAPTER  
VIDURA WARNS DHRITARASHTRA  
Sri Shukadeva says, "O Parikshit, Vidura deserted his homely comforts and 
luxuries because he had to protest against injustice." When, after losing in the 
game of dice, the Pandavas successfully passed the period of their exile and 
stay in guise, and were denied even then of their rightful share in the 
kingdom, Vidura was summoned for consultations. Vidura had then suggested 
Dhritrashtra thus "O king, if you wish to save your family, you please abandon 
Duryodhan who is an embodiment of all the evils. He is jealous of none other 
than Lord Krishna. 
That is why you are getting dull day by day and loosing your radiance." These 
words infuriated Duryodhan so much so that he began to abusively insult 
Vidura. But, Vidura didn't mind his words even though he felt seriously hurt at 
heart. Accepting his insult as a play of God, Vidura silently left Hastinapur and 
went on a pilgrimage. 
VIDURA COMES TO KNOW ABOUT KAURAVA'S DESTRUCTION  
Travelling through various pilgrimage places, Vidura reached Prabhas region 
where he got the news of total destruction of the Kaurvas. The news deeply 
moved him. In search of solace, he continued to wander from one place of 
pilgrimage to another place. During his wandering, when he reached the 
banks of the river Yamuna, Vidura met Uddhava the selfless and calm server 
of God. They both met affectionately and enquired about the wellbeing of 
each other. They were both reflecting on the plays of Lord Krishna and feeling 
extreme joy. Vidura had also got the news of departure of Lord Krishna to his 
abode and destruction of Yadavas by fierce infightings. 
So he was extremely depressed also. Uddhava told him that Lord Krishna 
himself had bestowed His grace on him and preached Bhagavat jnana, which 
He had once preached to Lord Brahma. 
By the dictate of Lord, Uddhava was going to Badrikasharma. So he suggested 
Vidura to see Maitreya for the metaphysical knowledge, for before departing 

827 
 



to his abode, Lord Krishna had dictated him (Maitreya) to preach Bhagavat to 
Vidura. As per the suggestion, Vidura reached Haridwar and saw the sage 
Maitreya on the banks of the river Ganges. 
The pious Vidura respectfully greeted the sage Maitreya and said, "O lord, the 
people in this world perform various actions with a desire to have pleasure. 
But neither do they get pleasure nor is their sorrow removed. Their sorrow 
increases instead. What is good then, is this context? O great among the 
sages, kindly preach me the way to peace, following which, one meets the 
God who then takes abode in the heart of his devotee and instills in him the 
Santan Gyan (eternal knowledge) that lets the devotee feel the direct 
presence of Him. 
Thus asked with devotion by Vidura, Mahatma Maitreya illuminated the glory 
of God and other events like creation of universe by illusion and origin of 
colossus body, and said: No one can measure the eternal glory of God and the 
illusions created by Him. 
In the beginning God created the primitive elements and the flaws associated 
with them. Then he created the colossus universe and entered it. 
DESCRIPTION OF TEN WAYS CREATION BY MAITREYA  
1. By the inspiration of God and because of imbalance in pious virtues, 
creation of Mahattatva (the soul) was the first (Mahattatva the soul).2. From 
Mahattatva (the soul) originates Ahankar (the ego) which generates five 
primitive elements (the earth, the fire, the air, the water and the ether), sense 
organs and motor organs. 
3. Group of Tanmatras (the subtle forms of matter) that generate the five 
major elements, is the third creation. 
4. Creation of organs that have the power of sensing and moving is the fourth 
creation. 
5. Creation of the mind that governs the senses and was appeared from ego, is 
the fifth creation. 

828 
 



6. Appearance of mind and the illusions that misguide it, is the sixth creation. 
7. The above mentioned six creations are known as natural creations also. 
Creatures other than these six have no power of knowledge, they can 
experience the touch only. These creatures like trees and other vegetables are 
known as the seventh creation. 
8. Eighth creation is of the birds and animals. 
9. Ninth creation is of those human beings who seek pleasure in action and 
luxuries which are infact the cause of sorrow. 
10. Tenth creation is of the great sages like Sanatkumar etc. Thus at the 
beginning of the Kalpa, God the creator used Rajas gunas (royal virtues) to 
create himself in the form of the universe. 
Maitreyaji says, " This whole creation is a manifestation of the plays of God. 
That omnipotent God created the universe just by His wish and for the sake of 
His play. For the extension of the creation, Lord Brahma wished and create 
four sons- Sanak, Sanandan, Sanatan and Sanatkumar. 
Thereafter, with a desire to create world, Lord Brahma ordered them to 
produce population. But Lord Brahma's sons had no interest in wordily affairs. 
Lord Brahma therefore cursed them to remain in children's form forever. Then 
from Lord Brahma's eyebrows appeared a baby, blue-red in color. The baby 
appeared in eleven forms and began to cry immediately after his arrival. Lord 
Brahma consoled him! "Don't cry my son, you will be named as Rundra." So 
the eleven forms of the baby came to be known as eleven Rundras. Rundranis 
(female Rundra) were also created. 
From Tamas Prakriti (malignant nature) Rundra created the ghosts, the 
spooks, the spectres, the Devils, lamias etc. Afraid by their appearances, Lord 
Brahma prayed Rudra, " O Mahadeva, please stop creating such formidable 
organisms. They are already enough in number. Now, you please undertake 
penance to comfort all the creatures." Thereafter, Lord Brahma created ten 
more sons- Marichi, Bhrigu, Kratu, Pulah, Pulatsya, Angira, Atri, Vashishtha, 
Daksha and Narada. Nine out of them took permission for the creation of their 

829 
 



offsprings, but Narada accepted celibacy and resolved to preach Bhagavat 
bhakti (devotion for God.) For the continuation of the creation, Lord himself 
appeared as a female from the left hand and as a male from the right hand of 
Lord Brahma. Those males and females forms were named Manu and 
Shatarupa respectively. They were the first in the whole creation to copulate 
and bring about sexual reproduction. They begot two sons- Priyvrat and 
Uttanapad, and three daughters- Devhuti, Akuti and Prasuti. As the primitive 
king, Manu was the fosterer of the earth. By then a demon named Hiranyaksh 
abducted the earth and hid it under the abyssimal depth of the ocean, causing 
worries for Lord Brahma. Instantly Lord appeared himself in Varaha (boar) 
incarnation and to do away with Lord Brahma's worries, He at once entered 
the depth of the ocean and rescued the earth on His long teeth. On the way 
the Lord had an encounter with Hiranyaksh and killed the demon with His 
wheel. 
Maitreya: says Hiranyaksh represented anger. Those who don't want to 
discharge their duties, but still wish to live with all the comforts are abductors 
of others wealth. Such people, who continuously interfere with equal 
distribution of wealth, must be condemned as the demons. 
On the origin of the demons, Maitreya cryptic said, once Diti, the wife 
Maharshi Kashyapa, expressed her desire to conceive. Maharshi Kashyapa 
tried to disuade her that time was not suitable for an auspicious job like 
conception. But Diti kept on insisting and forced her husband shamelessly to 
assist her in the process. Consequently she conceived during the dusk. 
Kashyapaji cautioned her "you will give birth to the demons." And with the 
arrival of the demons in Diti's womb, nature began to manifest herself 
adversely. 
There was terror and famine all around, and darkness prevailed even during 
day, with stars appearing in the sky. Frightened by these manifestations, the 
Gods asked Lord Brahma about the reason of all those disturbances. Lord 
Brahma informed them that two demons were to take birth from Diti. Those 

830 
 



two demons, told Lord Brahma, were the two gatekeepers-- Jay-Vijay, of the 
Lord's abode.  
Once, Sanakadi Kumar had gone to Vaikunthdham (God's abode) to see God 
but those two gatekeepers didn't let them in. Sanakadi tried thrice, but only to 
be stopped every time by those two gatekeepers at the gates. Hence, 
Sanakadi Kumar cursed them to take birth on earth as demons. Those two 
gatekeepers of God's abode Jay-Vijay appeared first as Hiranyakashipu and 
Hiranyaksha, second time as Ravana and Kumbhkuran and third time as 
Duntvakra and Shishupal. 
SAGE KARDAM  
Continuing the process of creation, Brahma produced Sage Kardam from his 
shadow and asked him to observe penance first. Thereafter, Brahma dictated 
Kardam to acquire physical strength and the strength of his sense and 
undertake the process of creating his offsprings. As per his father's dictate, 
Kardam observed severe penance. Pleased by his selfless penance, God asked 
Kardam to seek a boon. Karadam said, "Lord all the things in the world are 
ephemeral; only you're eternal. It will be an abuse of the intelligence to beg 
for some ephemeral thing from an eternal God." Overwhelmed by Kardam's 
plain words, God said in benediction 'On the third day from now you will be 
married to Devhuti, the daughter of Manu. Nine daughters will take birth in 
your home. I will myself appear as your son' Saying this, God disappeared. As 
per the boon Kardam got married to Devhuti, the daughter of Manu. Their 
formal marriage was the first of its kind in the creation, adopted as a 
religiously accepted means for continuation of life. Donating their daughter 
Devhuti to the sage Kardam, Manu and Shatarupa returned to their abode. As 
Mata Parvati used to serve Lord Lord Shiva, similarly Devhuti served Kardam 
with dedication. 
Once the sage Kardam noticed that Devhuti has aged and Sriveled by harsh 
living. Pleased by her dedication, Kardam asked her to seek a boon. Devhuti 
only begged that there should never be any lethargy in any service on her part 
towards him. Pleased again by her pure feelings Kardam provided her with 

831 
 



heavenly luxuries. Together they enjoyed those luxuries for many years during 
which nine daughters were born to them. All those daughters symbolised the 
Navadha Bhakti (nine kinds of devotion) and were married to nine Prajapatis 
like Marichi etc. Thus kala was married to Marichi, Anusuya to Atri, Shradha to 
Angira, Havirbhu to Pulatsya, Gati to Pulah, Shanti to Atharva, Krita to Kratu, 
Khyati to Bhrigu and Arundhati was married to the sage Vashishtha. 
LORD KAPILA  
Married life of Kardam and Devhuti is a lesson for all the civilized couples of 
the world. Abiding to the limits of human behaviour in married life is a 
guarantee for the wellbeing of the couple. 
Without religion and morality, a man is not more than an animal. Kardam and 
Devhuti followed strict rules to welcome the arrival of eternal God. Thus, in 
due time, God appeared as their son. 
With His arrival the Gods showered flowers. Lord Brahma alongwith his sons 
welcomed the God and said 'O pious daughter of Manu, Sri Hari has arrived as 
your son. He will destroy the lust, and illusion and will preach his own 
philosophy. He will be known in the world as Kapila. 
Worshiping the Lord Kapila, sage Kardam said 'O lord, by your grace, I'm free 
now from all the three obligations and all my desires are now granted.' With 
these words, Kardam took to asceticism. 
LORD KAPILA PREACHES METAPHYSICAL KNOWLEDGE TO DEVHUTI  
Mata Devhuti prayed Lord Kapila to preach the way for the benefaction of the 
soul, which is attached with ephimeral body. Lord said 'O mother, Adhayatma 
Yoga (spiritual conjugation) is the main way of benefaction for the human 
beings. With devotion for me, soul becomes selfknowing. 
Total devotion of the soul in my form and virtues and listening my tales, 
unmistakably show devotion. This leads to an inseparable rapport between 
my devotee and me. This is the greatest benefaction for the humans. 

832 
 



The world is like an ocean of death and I cause salvation of those who give up 
all their lusts and recite my name with fervent devotion. This whole nature 
has different forms, but it is ephimeral and constantly changing. It has twenty-
four divisions-five major elements (ether, air, fire, water and earth); five souls 
(sound, touch, appearance, fluid and smell); five sense organs (eyes, nose, 
ears, tongue and skin); five motor organs (mouth, hands, legs, penis and 
bones) and mind, intelligence, conscience and ego.That omnipresent Purusha 
(an epithet of God) voluntarily accepted Prakriti (an epithet for female force). 
From her various virtues, Prakriti created various creatures that corresponded 
exactly to the virtues that caused their creation. In the mess, the mantle that 
covered the knowledge also caused illusion for the Jivatma (microcosm of 
omnipotent spirit) which thus forgot his original appearance. 
The creature then began to assume the nature as a reflection of his own 
appearance-- though she is different from and opposite to him-- and himself 
as the doer. Such an ego regarding ones duties leads to his entanglement in 
the cycles of life and death. Differentiating between the Prakriti and Purusha 
and experiencing their real appearances respectively, introspecting sages have 
had a sight of the Supreme Being through their conscience and achieve the 
unparrlel Brahma Pada. 
Lord Kapila says, "Through the union of the sperm and the ovum, the human 
body appears as a lump in the womb. His body forms completely within six 
months. Sense organs develop thereafter. Twenty fifth element, the soul, then 
enters the human body. With that, the body begins to experience hunger and 
thirst. Then suffering with many kinds of desires, the microcosm prays me to 
save him from the tortures of staying in the womb. I present him with a sight 
of me in his heart. 
It then takes birth because of my grace. But as soon as it appears on the earth 
the human being begins to forget me. Still, I present him with my sight for two 
to three months more, when he begins to laugh. But people arooound him 
think that he is laughing for his mother. Nobody reminds him of me in his 
childhood. Youth of a human being passes in futile activities. In old age, his 

833 
 



organs begin to fail and a human being finds himself unable to recite my 
name. Thus, the whole life of a human being just passes in the illusion of 'I', 
'me' and 'my' and he reaches his last stage, and begins to realize his mistake. 
But then it is usually too late for him to do anything for his benefaction. If he 
has done any good deed in life, he may meet fortune, but without a devotion 
for me, no one can be happy. Only when the soul comes in my refuge, he gets 
free from the bondages of life and death. 
Maitre says, O Vidura, thereafter Devhuti concentrated her mind in the divine 
appearance of Sri Hari, as presented by Lord Kapila. At once, she got free from 
all the sufferings. She got a sight of God in her conscience and her body 
transformed into a holy river. The place where Mata Devhuti received 
salvation is still known as Siddhi Pada. It is a renowned place of pilgrimage. 
 
FOURTH CHAPTER  
DESCRIPTION OF THE CLANS OF MANU'S DAUGHTERS  
Maitreya then related the description of the Manu's daughters. Manu and 
Shatarupa had three daughtersAkuti, Devhuti and Prasuti. Akuti was married 
to a Prajapati named Ruchi. They begot two children-- a son and a daughter. 
The son later on came to be known as Yagyavatar of Lord Narayana, while the 
daughter was named Dakshaina. In due course, Yagya and Dakshaina begot 
twelve sons- Tosh, Pratosh, Santosh, Bhadra, Shanti, Indrapati, Idhm, Kavi, 
Vibhu, Swanh, Sudev and Rochan.Manu's second daughter Devhuti was 
married to the sage Kardam. They begot nine daughters who were married, in 
due course to nine Prajapatis. One of them, named Kala, was married to the 
sage Marichi. They begot Kashyapa and Purnima. Their offsprings comprise 
today's population of the entire world. Gati was the wife of Pulah. They begot 
three sons Karmshreshtha, Variyan and Sahishnu. 
Pleased by the penance of Ansuya and Atri, the Tridevas (trinity of Brahma, 
Vishnu and Lord Shiva) sent their parts as the sons to the hermit couple. 

834 
 



Among them Chandrama appeared from Brahma's part, Dattatreya from 
Vishnus part and sage Durvasa appeared from Lord Shiva's part. 
To Shardha and Angira were born four daughters- Simivali, Kuhu, Raka and 
Anumati. They begot two sons also- Utathya and Brihaspati. Havirbhu was 
married to Pulastya. They begot two sons- Agastya and Vishrava. In later 
course, sage Vishrava produced Yakshraj Kubera from Idvida, while his second 
wife Keshini gave birth to Ravana, Kumbhkaran and Vibhishan. 
Vashishtha and his wife Arundhati begot seven BrahmaRishis like Chitraketu. 
Sage Atharva and his wife Chitti begot a son Taponishth. Geat sage Bhrigu and 
his wife Khyati begot two sonsDhata and Vidhata, and a daughter- Sri. 
Manu's third daughter Prasuti was married to Daksha, the son of Lord 
Brahma. She got sixteen daughters. Daksha married thirteen of them to 
Dharm. Of the remaining three daughters, one was married to Agni, one to 
Pitrgana and one to Lord Lord Shiva. Shradha, Maitri, Daya, Shanti, Tushti, 
Pushti, Kriya, Unnati, Buddhi, Medha, Titiksha, Hree and Murti are the wives 
of Dharma. Of these Murti begot the sages Nar-Narayan. Swaha the wife of 
Agni begot three sonsPavak, Pawaman and Shuchi. Two daughters were born 
to Swadha the wife of Pitrganas. They were named Dharini and Vayuna. These 
both daughters were Brahma vadinis (expounders of vedas.) Sati, the 
youngest daughter of Daksha and wife of Mahadeva, however could not begot 
any offspring because she had committed immolation in her youth as a 
protest against her father's misbehaviour with her husband Mahadeva. 
MISBEHAVIOUR OF DAKSHA PRAJAPATI WITH LORD SHIVA  
Vidura asked Maitreya: 'Lord Shiva is an idol of peace. He has no enemity with 
anyone. He is self indulgent Why did then Daksha Prajapati misbehave with 
Him? Maitreya said, "  
Once a meeting of Brahmavadis (expounders of vedas) was organized. Along 
with all the Gods Lord Shiva and Brahma were also present in the meeting. 
Because of being a Prajapati, Daksha was allowed a late entry in the meeting. 
Moreover, when Daksha did arrive, all the Gods, except Brahma and Lord 

835 
 



Shiva, stood up to pay him regards. Honor by thousands of Gods did not 
please Daksha as much as he felt insulted the by behaviour of Lord Shiva. 
Brahma was the father of Daksha, so he didn't mind his behaviour. But seeing 
Lord Shiva sitting there and not paying due respect to him, Daksha got angry. 
He said, "He is like my disciple. I've married my daughter to him but he is 
uncourteous and irreligious. I committed a blunder by marrying my daughter 
to him. He smears ashes of pyre and roams at the cremation sites. Only the 
ghosts are his companions." Thus, Daksha cursed Lord Shiva. "May this Lord 
Shiva not get his due share along with the Gods in oblations." Nandi, the 
prominent among Lord Shiva's servers, cursed Daksha in retaliation: "May the 
unwise Daksha lose his mind and be like an animal always bound to a 
woman." Thereafter indignant Lord Shiva at once left the meeting alongwith 
his followers. But still Daksha didn't put the matter at rest. To humble Lord 
Shiva, he organised a grand yagya named Barhaspati. All the BrahmaRishis, 
devaRishis, pitars, Gods etc. attended the yagya alongwith their wives. 
From her abode on Kailash, Sati saw all the Gods going through air to the 
grand occasion. She also learned about the grand yagya organised by her 
father Daksha. Out of curiosity, she insisted her husband Lord Lord Shiva, "O 
Vamdev, your father-in-law, Daksha Prajapati has organised a grand feast. If 
you wish, should we also go there to attend the feast. I desire to see my 
beloved mother, sisters, and other relatives." Lord Shiva replied! "O beautiful, 
though one may go without invitation to his parents' home, may visit teachers 
and siblings. But your father resents me. So it is not good if we go there 
uninvited. I will not tolerate if he humiliates you. So, you should not go there, 
because a humiliation by a near one may cause immediate death.' In fact, Sati 
had a logical mind, while Lord Shiva gave more weightage to faith than logic. 
Sati even had a doubt regarding God's incarnation as Lord Rama, that how 
could Parbrahma Parmatma, who is the father of all, be a son of any human 
being. Moreover, how could the Supreme Being be in so much sorrow 
because of his wife's separation. Lord Shiva and Sati, therefore, had a sight of 
Lord Rama in exile. Lord Shiva silently saluted Lord Rama's appearance, while 

836 
 



Sati decided to give Rama a test. So taking a guise of Sita, Sati appeared 
before Rama. Lord Rama knew everything so he regarded her as Sati. He also 
showed her some of His glories. 
Now Sati had firm belief in Lord Rama. She returned to Lord Shiva and gave 
her verdict that Lord Rama was indeed an incarnation of the Supreme Being. 
But Lord Shiva was much disturbed by Sati because of her taking the guise of 
Sita. 
Lord Shiva had, therefore, acquired an indifferent stance towards Sati. Thus 
she was feeling anguished by Lord Shiva's behaviour. Hence she prayed 
silently: 'O Lord, may my body be destroyed soon, as this body is not able to 
serve Lord Shiva' Hence, when she heard about the grand feast organised by 
her father, in abject violation of her husband's dictate, Sati got ready to attend 
the feast. Lord Shiva too sent her with a lot of gifts and servants. There at 
Daksha's palace Sati found that all were ignoring her because of her father's 
fear. Even her sisters laughed at her for coming alone. In all, Sati found 
nothing favourable in her father's home. Only her mother welcomed her that 
too in isolation. Indignant, Sati went straight to the Yagya Mandap (canopy for 
performing oblation) and found that no seat had been allotted there for Lord 
Shiva.With anger she said; 'Even the mere name of Lord Shiva is enough to 
destroy all the sins of the humans. No one can violate His dictate. And you, O 
father, feel jealous of such an auspicious figure, holy, Lord Lord Shiva, who is 
soul of every living being. I am ashamed of having this body produced from an 
opponent of Lord Shiva, like you.' Saying these words, Sati threw herself in the 
flames of Yagyagni (the fire of the Yagya) Thereafter, Lord Shiva's ganas 
(servers) destroyed the Yagya. They beheaded Daksha and dropped his head 
in the altar. Other Gods and the sages were also punished for showing 
disrespect for Lord Shiva. Ultimately, Lord Brahma, accompanied by the Gods, 
went to Kailash and pacified Lord Shiva. Ashutosh Lord Shiva granted them a 
boon to carry the Yagya to completion. 
In her next birth, Sati was born in the home of Himalayas. She was named as 
Parvati. Sober, cool, and an idol of faith, Mata Parvati dedicated herself fully 

837 
 



to Lord Shiva. Narada gave her a talisman to get Lord Shiva as her husband. 
Lord Narayan himself requested Lord Shiva to accept Parvati as his wife. Lord 
Shiva accepted to get married with Parvati. Thus, through hard penance, Mata 
Parvati got Lord Shiva as her husband. In due course the auspicious marriage 
of Mata Parvati with Lord Shiva took place. 
TALE OF DHRUVA  
The self-begotten Manu had two sons- Priyvrat and Uttanpad. King Uttanpad 
had two queensSuniti and Suruchi. Uttanpad loved Suruchi more than he 
loved Suniti. So Suniti was forced to live outside the royal palace with her son 
Dhruva, while Suruchi and her son Uttam enjoyed all the luxuries in the 
palace.  
Once the King was playing with his soon Uttam who was siting in his lap. 
Meanwhile, Dhruva too arrived there and began insisting to sit in his father's 
lap. But for the fear of Suruchi the king did not take Dhruva in his lap. Just 
then, Suruchi too arrived there. 
Strutting at her fortune, she ridiculed Dhruva: 'Though you are also a son of 
the king, but you have no right to sit on the throne because you are not borne 
to me. You are the son of queen Suniti who is neglected by the King, and now 
lives like a mistress. So your desire is hard to accomplish. Even then if you 
wish to have the throne, you begin to worship Lord Narayana, and take birth 
through me by His grace and then wait for your chance to sit in the King's lap.' 
Hurt by his stepmother's harsh words, Dhruva came to his mother crying. 
When Suniti heard about the incidence, she felt very sorry. Still, with patience 
she consoled her son Dhruva, 'O my son, don't wish ill for the others. Those 
who cause sorrow for others, have to face the outcome themselves one day. 
Your stepmother is right. You have been born to me. Even then, if you wish to 
be enthroned like the prince Uttam, give up your jealousy and start 
worshipping Lord Narayan. Even you're grand father Manu and great grand- 
father Lord Brahma worshipped him. 

838 
 



Only Lord Narayan can remove your sorrow.' Mother's words shook the 
conscience of Dhruva. He at once set out with firm determination to please Sri 
Hari by penance. Leaving the town, while going in search of solitude he met 
devarshi Narada in the way. Dhruva respectfully greeted Narada. Narada 
lovingly caressed his head and tried to test his determination. Narada tried 
everything to convince Dhruva to send him back to his home, but he failed to 
shake the firm determination of the boy. Then with kindness, Narada 
preached Dhruva about Lord's appearance and gave him a mantra. Thus, 
Narada performed his duty as Guru and blessing Dhruva, he disappeared. 
Dhruva arrived in Madhuvan and took a seat under a Kadamba tree on the 
bank of the river Yamuna. There he began to recite the mantra and 
meditation. During the first month he ate roots and tubers. In the second 
month he ate dried leaves. During the third month he managed with Yamuna's 
water. 
During the fourth month he sustained himself on the air only. Dhruva even 
stopped breathing. 
Now, standing on one leg only, he was fully concentrated in Lord Vasudev. At 
the moment when Dhruva stopped breathing and concentrated in Parbrahma, 
all the three worlds shook with fear. 
All the Gods ran to the refuge of Lord. Because of stopping of breath all the 
organisms stood still.Assuring them not to be afraid, Lord arrived in 
Madhuvan to see His beloved devotee Dhruva. Seeing the Lord Himself arrived 
before him, Dhruva's eyes filled with tears. He said, " O Lord, I don't know how 
to worship you." Lord touched his cheek with His conch. With that, Dhruva 
came to realize the glory of God. With complete devotion and folded hands, 
he worshiped Sri Hari: "I salute to such an omnipotent, omnipresent and all 
knowing Lord, whose power is present in everybody, and who entering my 
heart revived my speech." Pleased by his prayer Lord stroked Dhruva's head 
and said, " Your desire shall materialize. After enjoying your kingdom, you 
shall come to my abode which is far above the SaptRishis? Then by God's 
permission, Dhruva returned to his father's palace. There he was given a grand 

839 
 



welcome. Everyone wants to be kind with the one who has God's grace, his 
father handed him the kingdom of the entire earth. His brother, Uttam had 
gone to the forest for hunting where the Yakshas killed him. Indignant by his 
brother's death, Dhruva at once launched an attack on the Yakshas. But his 
grandfather consoled him that the devotees of God don't long for revenge. 
Thereafter Dhruva ruled the earth for a period of thirty-six thousand years. 
Even death bowed before him. Indeed, the devotees of God have no fear of 
death. The death fears them on the contrary. 
TALE OF PRITHU  
In the lineage of the king Dhruva, had occurred a king named Anga. Anga's 
wife was Sumita, who was the daughter of Mrityadev. They had a son named 
Vena who was evil in nature. When he grew up and occupied the throne, he 
became a very cruel ruler. Day by day his atrocites increased. Then he began 
to openly insult the greatmen. When his atrocities became uncontrollable, 
sages killed him by their curse to save the people. 
Thereafter, the sages churned Vena's dead body and produced a couple- a 
man and a woman. The man was born by the world-preserving part of Lord 
Vishnu. He came to be known as Prithu. He got an extremely pretty wife Archi. 
Prithu was the Acharya (master) of Lord Archan Bhakti. 
With his occupying the throne, the subjects became religious, happy and 
moral-abiding people. 
Everything was going well in his kingdom, when one day the farmers 
approached him and complained, "O king, the earth has grown rude. She does 
not give us cereals, even though we sow a lot of seeds in every season. She 
eats them all." King Prithu set out at once to chastise the earth who ran in the 
form of a cow to save herself. Scolding at her king Prithu said, "O Vasudhu 
(earth) I will kill you. You have violated my rule." The earth then came to his 
shelter and begged for pardon. " O king it is not my fault my fertility has ended 
because of the sins of the king Vena. Now, I'm present before you in the form 
of a cow. Now, you please exploit me fully to make everybody happy." King 

840 
 



Prithu resolved then and there to perform a hundred Ashvmedh Yagyas. His 
ninety-nine Yagyas completed unabatedly. But during the hundredth Yagya, 
Indra kidnapped the horse deceitfully. Indra had himself performed one 
hundred Ashvmedh Yagyas. He could not tolerate anybody equaling him, for 
then the performer would have equal claim on Indrasana (the seat of Indra.) 
Prithu's son was Vijitashva. He had seen Indra stealing the horse deceitfully. 
He even chased Indra for some distance, but Indra transformed himself into a 
hermit. Somehow, the oblation completed, and God appeared and asked the 
king to seek a boon. King Prithu begged, " O Lord, my soul remains unsatiated 
by your tales. So if you are pleased with me, kindly give me a hearing equal to 
the hearings of ten thousand ears." Sanakadiks preached knowledge to the 
king Prithu. Thereafter, fostering his subjects religiously, king Prithu ruled the 
earth for thousand years. During the rule, king's popularity spread in leaps and 
bounds. At last he got the supreme position of God." Thus narrating the tale of 
Prithu, Maitreya says to Vidura: 'those who listen to this tale of Prithu, that 
shows the glory of God, get a strong affection for God and receive salvation 
ultimately, like Prithu.'  
FABLE OF PURANAJAN  
King Prithu's son was Vijitashu. In his lineage later on occurred a king named 
Prachin Barhi. 
King Prachin Barhi had many sons. All of them were known as Prachetas, they 
were all devotees of God and had been sunk in devotion since their childhood. 
Pleased by their devotion once Lord Shiva appeared before them. With 
simplicity, Prachetas asked, " O Lord of the lords, we have been worshipping 
Narayana, how did you arrive before us?" Lord Shiva said, " Those who have 
devotion for Narayan, are also dear to me." Thereafter Lord Shiva gave them 
Rudra Geet which the Prachetas continued to sing for years immersed in the 
water. 
King Prachinbarhi had a great interest in oblations that involved sacrifice. One-
day devarshi Narada asked him, "What are you doing, O king?" Miseries don't 
end by action alone, nor does one get supreme joy. The animals which you 

841 
 



have sacrificed for your oblations also feel the pain given by you. They are all 
waiting for you in the heaven. When you go there after death they will take 
revenge one by one." Frightened by these words, King Prachinbarhi took 
shelter at Narada and said, " Devarshi, my mind is caught in the actions. You 
kindly show me the way to the supreme salvation." At the request of the king, 
Narada narrated him the tale of Vigyat and Avigyat. At the behest of Avigyat, 
Vigyat migrated to and settled in a beautiful city. There he met the queen 
Puranajani and got married to her. He was so much indulged in sensual 
pleasures with Puranajani that he became a woman in the next birth. As a 
woman, Vigyat got married in due course, but was widowed soon. She wanted 
to commit Sati (self-immolation) but people prevented her.One-day she was 
travelling on an elephant, when she spotted some swans in the sky. She asked 
the mahout to look at them. As soon as the mahout's attention diverted, the 
elephant got out of control and both of them fell on the ground and died. As 
she was looking at the swans at her last time, she became a swan in her next 
birth. As a swan she reached the lake Manasarovar, where she met her old 
friend Avigyat who consoled the swan. "You are neither a man nor a woman. 
We are both swans now. You are same as me, no different from me. It means 
that there is no difference between the living beings and the God. There is 
only one soul. Its because of nonknowledge that one sees the God and the 
living beings differently." Thus cautioned by his friend Avigyat, Vigyat realized 
and accepted his incarnation as a swan. 
But, the king Prachinbarhi didn't get the meaning of the spiritual tale. Narada 
then revealed. 
"God is Avigyat while microcosm is Vigyat. Avigyat has established eighty-four 
lakhs cities and asked Vigyat to select any one of them. After sorting lakhs of 
cities the microcosm selects a city like the human body. That city has a lake in 
the center-the belly from where the whole city is controlled. Again it has nine 
gates-two eyes, two nostrils, one mouth, two ears, one reproductive organ 
and one anus. It is such a highway, treading which no one returns. It has two 
courtiersmind and ego. The living being passes his life caught between them. 

842 
 



Queen Puranajani is the intellect in this body. Because of this intellect or non-
knowledge the living being or microcosm begins to feel in terms of 'I', 'My' and 
'Me' for his body and organs. 
All the ten organs are his friends, through which the living being experiences 
the sensation and performs action. Inclinations of the organs are his friends. 
All the five Pranas (breaths) are the five-hooded serpent that guards the body. 
Old age is Kal Kanya who launches an attack on the city (human body). Shoka 
and Moha (sorrow and attachment) are the two brothers of Kal Kanya. 
Kal Kanya is married to Chandveg who is also known as Varsh (year). It has 
three hundered and sixty Gandharvas (days of year). Twelve months are his 
twelve commanders and seven days are the ministers. They all together 
plunder the human body like the city of Puranajan. Thus, covered by Ajnana 
(non-knowledge), the living being, which has a great pride on his body, 
virtually wastes his life suffering different kinds of pains. From this mystical 
preaching Prachinbarhis inclination for Vedic Karmkands (action) and 
temptation for mundane luxuries were removed. 
By the grace of Devarshi Narada, the king got a perception of God and living 
being. He at once abdicated his attachment for the body and concentrated his 
mind in God. 
 
FIFTH CHAPTER  
TALE OF PRIYVRATA  
Hearing the tale of Prachetas' devotion and receiving God's grace by them, a 
curiosity arose in the mind of the king Parikshit about self-knowledge and 
Grihasth Dharma (duties of a married person). He asked Shukdev, "O Brahmin, 
Priyvrat was a supreme devotee and self-indulgent. Why did he then live in 
Grihasthi (married life)? Married life is binding from all sides. Greatmen never 
long for married life. Even then the king Priyurata lived a married life yet he 
regularly prayed to God. This is an intriguing subject for me, kindly remove my 
doubts. 

843 
 



Seeing Parikshits curiosity and doubts, Sri Shukdev said, "O king you are right 
that once receiving God's grace one can't leave it. No attachment, no love 
remains in him for life. The prince Priyurata was a great devotee of God 
(Bhagavat Bhakta). By the grace of Narada he had instinctively become aware 
of Parmarth tatva (knowledge that leads to salvation). He had dedicated all his 
actions into the feet of Lord Vasudev. Thus, an intense inclination for 
detachment developed in Priyvrata since his childhood. So, Lord Brahma tried 
to admonish him. 
"Son, you are too young yet to be an ascetic. Since the moment you've 
acquired the human body, enemies like Kama (sex), Krodh (anger) Moha 
(affection), Lobh (greed), Mada (ego), Matsar (jealousy) etc. have been 
continuously chasing it. We're all bound to follow the path laid down by God. 
We should serve Him by our action, accepting our body, which the God has 
given to us and the merits associated with it. Hence, you first enjoy the 
luxuries given by God, thereafter you will be free to do what you wish." Thus, 
as per the dictate of Lord Brahma, the king Priyvrata accepted two wives. His 
first wife was Prajapati Vishwkarma's daughter Barhismati. She begot ten 
sons- Agnidhra, Idhmjihv, Yagyabahu, Mahavir, Miranyreta, Savan, 
Medhatithi, Dhriprishth, Vitihotra and Kavi. Priyvrat's second wife begot three 
sons- Uttam, Raiwat and Tamas. Out of these ten sons, three became celibate. 
All the three sons from the second wife became the lords of different 
Manvantaras. 
Despite leading married life, the king remained an ascetic. In his chariot, he 
travelled around the land and divided it into seven parts and appointed each 
of his seven sons as the Lord of one island. Agnidhra, the eldest son was given 
Jambu Dweep. He was married to an apsara Purvchitti. She had begotten nine 
sons who became the ruler of the nine parts of Jambu Dweep. 
Merudevi was the wife of Agnidhra's eldest son Nabhi. As a gift of Yagya, Lord 
had taken an incarnation in his home. That incarnation of Lord is known as 
Rishabhdev. 
TALE OF BHARATA  

844 
 



Rishabhdev was married to Jayanti, the daughter of Indra. Jayanti gave birth 
to one hundred sons. Bharata was the eldest among them. The youngest nine 
sons became Yogeshwars. Eightyone sons accepted Brahaminism. Remaining 
nine brothers followed their elder brother Bharata. 
One day Rishabhdev called a meeting of his sons and preached them about 
the well being of human beings. "Sons" he said, "Never misuse this human 
body. You have got this human life by great luck and God's grace. He does not 
deserve to be called as a friend, teacher or father who does not preach his 
friend, disciple or son about the welfare of the self." Preaching that 
Rishabhdev enthroned Bharata and himself departed for his supreme abode. 
The king Bharata was a great devotee. By his father's permission he had 
married to Panchjam, the daughter of Vishurupa. They begot five sons. 
Bharata dedicated his religious actions to Lord Vasudev. Thus by the 
purification of his actions, his conscience was also purified. So he transferred 
the kingdom to his son and himself took an abode in Pulahashrama 
(hermitage of Pulaha) on the banks of the river Gandaki. There he passed his 
time in the worship of God. 
One fine morning, when he was performing libations in the river, a pregnant 
Doe arrived on the opposite bank to drink water. At that time a lion roared 
somewhere in the forest behind her. 
Frightened by the roar, the doe jumped into the river to save her life. But the 
doe lost her life in the action while her foetus fell in the river. 
Feeling pity for the fawn, Rajarshi Bharata took it and began to foster it. Day 
by day Bharata's affection grew for the fawn. Slowly he became irregular in his 
daily routine. But Bharata loved the fawn more than his routine. When the 
fawn grew into a deer, by its natural instinct it joined its mates. On his return, 
Bharata did not find the deer and grew so restless that he died out of 
depression. As his mind was fixed on the deer at death, he was born in his 
next birth as a deer. 
Bharata was a prudent man. But affection did not spare even him. 

845 
 



What would be the fate of common people then? They are easy targets of the 
feelings and are more vulnerable to fall prey to attachment and affection. 
When a derangement occurs in the intellect of man, he begins to conduct 
irreligiously, but thinks that his behaviour is religious. 
Realizing his mistake, Bharata as a deer, came to his hermitage and once again 
began his penance before God. Even in deer incarnation Bharata had a strong 
feeling of detachment. 
When Bharata's deer incarnation ended, he took his next birth in a Brahmin's 
home. Sometime after the birth, his mother died. By God's grace Bharata had 
remembrance of his previous birth. 
So he always remained immersed in reflection on Hari (God). To avoid 
attention he posed himself as an insane stupid, blind and deaf person. Even 
his brothers neglected him seeing his inertia. Now he was free to wander at 
will. He was satisfied with what he got and doing menial jobs. 
During that period, a thief, who had no son, wanted to offer a human-sacrifice 
to Bhadrakali in desire of a son. Searching a right person for the sacrifice, his 
men found and caught JadaBharata (In Brahmin incarnation, Bharata was 
known by this name because of his inactivity), who was guarding his farms 
then. Jada Bharata remained quite indifferent and did not even resist his 
kidnapping. The thieves took him into the temple. There as soon as the chief 
of the thieves raised his sword to kill Jada Bharata, Bhadrakali appeared from 
the idol and beheaded all the thieves. It shows that one has to bear the fruit 
himself of the crime committed. But Jada Bharata did not experience this and 
remained quite unmoved as before. 
In another incidence, the king Rahugana of Sindhu was riding a palanquin to 
the hermitage of the sage Kapila. On the way, he fell short for one Kahar 
(carrier of the palanquin). His men found Jada Bharata who was wandering 
nearby and yoked him also in carrying the palanquin. Jada Bharata was 
walking cautiously so as not to tread on even little creatures. Hence, the king 
was getting jerks and a bumpy ride. He scolded at the Kahars. The Kahars 

846 
 



informed him that the new recruit was causing him those jerks. The king 
Rahungana then scolded at Jada Bharata. "Hey, are you so frail that you can't 
balance the palanquin properly. Don't you know that your master is riding in 
it? Wait, I'll teach you a lesson." Jada Bharata stood fearlessly. The king was 
stunned to see him. It was then that Jada Bharata opened his mouth to utter 
is first words. He felt that he had carried the king on his shoulders, and though 
the king was a haughty man, '...but my life will be a sheer wastage if I don't 
preach the king a way to salvation...' So with a desire of benefiting the king 
Jada Bharata said, " O king, life and death, strength and weakness are the 
virtues of the body. But the soul is sinless. I have put all my burden on the 
shoulders of the God. You too have great burden on your head. Lord of 
everyone is one. Even your senses are not in your control how then will you 
control your subjects? O king only knowledge is the form of the soul. By 
knowledge alone you can recognize the soul. Union with one homogenous 
and holy Supreme Being is the true introspection. But as long as you don't 
bear the dust of great men's feet on your head, you will not recognize the 
God.Hearing these words, the king Rahungana fell at the feet of Jada Bharata 
and begged his pardon. 
Jada Bharata then preached the king about the metaphysical knowledge. 
"Listening to the tales of the God continuously is the only way to concentrate 
one's mind in Sri Hari. In my previous birth I was the king of Bharatavarsh. But 
because of my attachment for a deer, I was Deviated from the path of 
supreme knowledge. Hence, I had to take birth in deer form. But by the grace 
of Lord Krishna, memory of my previous birth persisted in a deer incarnation 
also. So in my present birth I prefer to stay away from the people and wander 
secretly. So, from now on drop your attachments and start reciting God's 
name. By the virtues of His tale alone you will easily get Him. O King, the body 
is like a merchant, who is roaming on the earth borrowing this wealth of age. 
It has lost its wealth in useless worldly affairs. One-day arrow of the Kal will 
snatch everything from it. So, the human being must utilise their invaluable 
moments in the training of the supreme knowledge."  

847 
 



DESCRIPTION OF THE EXTENT OF THE LANDMASS  
Hearing the tale of the king Priyvrat's lineage, Parikshit asked Shukdev: "O 
great sage, what is the expanse of the landmass? I wish to hear a description 
of it alongwith its islands, because this world is a tangible idol of God 
alongwith his virtues. Hence, knowing it intangible, infinitesimal form of God 
can also be known.' Shukdev said: 'O King, illusions created by God are so vast 
that nobody can find their end. 
Therefore, I will describe main features of the world with the help of name, 
appearance, extent and symptoms. King Priyvrata has divided the earth into 
seven islands. These islands are:  
(1)Jambudweep, 
(2)Plukshdweep, 
(3)Shalmalidweep 
(4)Kushdweep, 
(5)Kronchdweep, 
(6)Shakdweep and 
(7)Pushkardweep.  
All these islands are surrounded by seven seas, which comprise of saline 
water, sugarcane juices, and wine, ghee, milk, whay and sweet water 
respectively. Extent of each island is double than that of its preceding one. 
Jambudweep: -  
Shukdev says, 'Situated in the center of the world is Jambudweep. It has an 
extent of one lakh Yojan. It has a round shape like a lotus leaf. It has nine 
zones each with an extent of nine thousand Yojan. These zones are called 
Varsh. Eight mountain ranges mark the boundaries of these Varsh which are 
arranged in circular fashion. At the center of the Varsh, is the tenth Varsh 
named Illavrit. In the center of Illavrit is Meru. Names of other nine Varsh are - 
KinPurusha, Harivarsh, Kamyak, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadrashwa, Ketumal and 

848 
 



Bharata. Such as the mount Meru is surrounded by Jamudweep, similarly 
Jamudweep is surrounded by a vast sea. 
Because of a majority of Jamun (black berry) trees, this island is named as 
Jambudweep. 
Plukshdweep: -  
As there is a huge Jamun (black berry) tree that is eleven hundred Yojan high 
in Jambhudweep, similarly there are innumerable Pluksh (Pakur-Ficus 
pinctoria) trees in Plukshdweep hence its name. Agni (fire) is the venerable 
God in this island. Priyvrata's son, King Idhmjihv was the ruler of this island. He 
divided it into seven parts and made his seven sons the ruler of these 
divisions. These seven divisions were named- Shiv, Yavas, Subhadra, Shant, 
Kshem, Amrit and Abhay. These divisions have seven mountains, and seven 
rivers. 
Plukshdweep has an extent of two lakh Yojans. It is surrounded by an ocean of 
sugarcane juice.Shalmalidweep: - Just double in extent than Plukshddweep, is 
Shalmalidweep. It has a majority of Shalmali (silk cotton) trees, which 
comprise the abode of Garuda, the King of the birds. 
Priyvrata's son Yagyabahu was the ruler of this island. He too made seven 
divisions in the island as per his sons- Surocham, Devvarsh, Paribhadra, 
Ramanak, Saumanasya, Apyayan and Avigyat. 
This island too has seven mountains and seven rivers. Four classes of people 
inhabite this island. 
They worship Vedmay Chandrama (the moon with vedas) This island is 
surrounded by a sea of wine. 
Kushdweep: -  
This island is surrounded by a sea of the Ghee. It has an extent of eight Yojans, 
and a majority of Kush shrubs. From the light of their tips, Kush shrubs 
illuminate this island. 

849 
 



Priyvrata's son Hiranyarata was the ruler of this island. Dividing the island into 
seven divisions, he too appointed his seven sons as the ruler of each of these 
divisions. These divisions are- Vasu, Vasuddana, Drirhruchi, Nabhigupta, 
Stutyavrata, Vivikt and Vamaddev. People of Kushdweep worship the fire. 
Kraunchdweep: -  
With an extent of sixteen lakh Yojan, Kraunchdweep is surrounded by the sea 
of milk. There is a gigantic mountain named Kraunch on the dweep. After this 
mountain the island is known as Kraunchdweep. Priyvrata's son, King 
Ghritprishtha was the ruler of this island. He too divided the island into seven 
divisions and distributed them between his seven sons, one to each son. The 
names of these seven sons are- Am, Madhuruh, Meghprishth, Sudhama, 
Mrajishth, Lohitarn and Vanaspati. Inhabitants of the island worship 
Varunadev (Neptune) the Lord of water. 
Shakadweep: -  
Surrounded by the sea of whey is Shakadweep with an extent of thirty-two 
lakh Yojans. It has a huge tree of Shaka, hence its name. With a sweet 
fragrance of this tree, the whole island emits a pleasant scent. The ruler of this 
island, Medhatithi was also a son of Priyvrata. He too had seven sons- Purojav, 
Manojav, Pawamana, Dhumranik, Chitraref, Bahurup and Vishwdhar. They 
were made the rulers of the seven divisions of the island. People of the island 
use Pranayama to weaken their Rajoguna and Tamoguna, and worship Hari 
(Vishnu) in Vayu (form) through meditation. 
Pushkardweep: -  
Pushkardweep has an extent of sixty-four Yojans. It is surrounded by a sea of 
sweet water. There is present a huge lotus flower with a million, golden 
petals. This lotus is regarded as a seat of Brahma. Priyvrata's son Vitihotra was 
the ruler of this island. He divided the island into two divisions, and made his 
sons Ramanak and Dhataki the rulers of these divisions. Inhabitants of this 
island worship Brahma appearance of Sri Hari (Vishnu). 
 

850 
 



SIXTH CHAPTER  
TALE OF AJAMIL  
The king Parikshit requested Shukdev, "O preacher, so far you have related 
about the way how to overcome attachment for wordily things. Inadvertently, 
the lliving beings commit some kinds of sins or crimes. O great soul, now 
kindly tell me the way by which humans can get rid themselves of the 
tortures, they are supposed to be subjected to in the hells." Shukdev said, "A 
sinner is sure to be tortured in hell, unless and until he had observed penance 
for his sins in his present birth. But even penance is no guarantee of his 
salvation if the person indulges again in sins thereafter. It is all because of 
ignorance, that desires to commit sin does not end. Spiritual ways are, 
thereafter necessary. Adopting spiritual ways like penance, celibacy, 
tranquility, self-restraint, abdication, truthfulness, holiness, restraint of 
passions and discipline, even the most serious sins are destroyed. 
Alternatively, taking refuge at the God or developing a devotion for Him, all 
the sins can be destroyed. O Parikshit, such a sanctification of the sinner as 
achieved by dedication to God, is rare even by observing penance." Shukdev 
narrated the tale that was once related by Muni Agastya. In the town of 
Kannauj, lived a Brahmin named Ajamil. He had married to his mistress. Being 
with an unchaste woman his Brahminical virtues had been destroyed. Now, 
Ajamil earned his living not by performing holy tasks, but instead he restored 
to petty tricks like plundering, deceiving and even killing people to feed his 
family. 
Once, a group of Mahatmas (ascetics) came to the town. People greeted and 
offered them with edible items. But the ascetics refused to accept anything. 
They said that they would accept the food only from the household where 
holy food is cooked for the Lord. Irritated people showed the ascetics the way 
to Ajamil's home. From Ajamil, the ascetics accepted the alms and themselves 
cooked the food, and offered it to God and ate themselves. Now the heart of 
Ajamil and his wife were filled with expiation. 

851 
 



The ascetics wished to cause some benefit for Ajamil. They said to him, "If you 
get a son now, please name him Narayana. Ascetics words did materialize and 
Ajamil got one more son, the tenth one. As per ascetics advice, Ajamil named 
him Narayana. Being the youngest son, Narayana was very dear to Ajamil. He 
used to remember Narayana always. Everything was passing as usual, when 
the time of Ajamil's departure arrived suddenly one day. Yamadutas (agents of 
Yama-the God of death) began to take him for his last journey. Not seeing his 
youngest son Narayana before him, Ajamil began to call out loudly: 'Narayana-
Narayana.' Hearing the calls, servers of Lord Vishnu too arrived there and 
challenged Yamadutas. The frightened Yamadutas said, " We are the servants 
of Dharmraj. Why are you stopping us?" Servers of Lord Vishnu said, "If you 
are the servants of Dharmaraj define Dharma (religion) then." Yamadutas said, 
"Actions dictated by Vedas are Dharma (religion) in true sense, and the 
actions forbidden by Vedas are Adharma (irreligious) and Veda is Narayana 
Himself." The servers said, "You're unaware of Param Dharma (Supreme 
religion). This sinner has called out the name of God, so his sins, from the past 
crores of births, have been washed away. Now he is no more a sinner. Wise 
men say that recitation of God's name by any means- as a name of someone 
else, in derision or derogation- automatically does away with all the sins. This 
is the bounty of God's name that a mere remembrance of it- whether wittingly 
or unwittingly, does destroy all sins." Hearing this dialogue, Ajamil awakened, 
as if from a long slumber. 
Yamdutas had returned to Yamaloka by then. But, the abject sinner Ajamil had 
recovered from the snare of death. Without losing a moment, Ajamil went to 
the banks of the Ganges. There, drinking the holy water of the Ganges he left 
his body and went and found a place in Vaikunth Loka-the abode of Lord 
Vishnu. 
DIALOGUE OF YAMA AND YAMADUTS  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, when the servers of Lord Vishnu failed the attempt 
of Yamadutas, they returned to Yamaloka and complained Yama about the 
event.”  

852 
 



“O Yamadev, we had so far known that you are the sole authority of punishing 
the people as per their deeds. No body had dared so far to violate your rule. 
But today those four servers of Lord Vishnu openly caused violation of your 
dictate." Yamaraja silently prayed Lord Vishnu and said, " Lord Narayana is the 
Lord of all living things. He is the Lord of me also, and I myself keep an account 
of the sins and pious deeds of the living beings by His order only. All the God's, 
Digpals (guardian of the direction), Shiva and Brahma etc. all of them follow 
His dictates.The greatest duty of all the living beings is that they should 
achieve a dedicated devotion for the Lord. Sons just look at the bounty of Lord 
that even the sinner like Ajamil escaped the noose of death simply by calling 
out the names of the God just once. So, from now on you never go near those 
people who are reciting Lord's name or are his devotees. Bring only the 
sinners to me." BIRTH OF DAKSHA FROM PRACHETAS  
Shukdev says, "Ten sons of the King Prachinbarhi were known as Prachetas. 
They observed severe penance under the sea. When they re-emerged, 
Chandra (the moon-the ruler of the vegetation) calmed them and presented a 
beautiful daughter of the apsara Prabhlocha, to them as their wife. From her, 
Prachetas begot prachetas Daksha. In due course the subject of Daksha spread 
all over the world and populated far off places. Daksha created, first of all the 
Gods, the demons and the human beings who inhabited the heaven, the earth 
and the waters respectively. 
But Daksha was not still satisfied. He therefore went to Vinddhyachal and 
started a severe penance there. Pleased by his penance God appeared before 
him. By the permission of God, Daksha Prajapati married with Ashinki the 
daughter of Panchama Prajapati. From Ashinki Daksha got ten thousand sons 
named Haryashva. In due course Daksha asked his sons to reproduce. But 
instead of reproducing they all reached Narayana Sarovar on the banks of the 
river Sindhu (Indus) to a place of pilgrimage beguiled by the preaching of 
Narada about Bhagavat Dharma. Daksha again produced one thousand sons 
named Shavlashva and asked them to reproduce. But they too followed the 

853 
 



footsteps of their elder brothers, and took no interest in worldly affairs. 
Narada preached them also about Bhagavat Dharma. 
When Daksha came to realize that Narada had converted his sons into ascetics 
by his preaching he angrily cursed Narada to be a wanderer forever with 
nowhere a place to stay on. Narada accepted Daksha's curse and blessed him 
with a boon to have sixty daughters for the continuation of his subject. By the 
virtue of the boon, sixty daughters were born in the home of Daksha in due 
course. When they grew up, Daksha got ten of them married to Dharma. Then 
ten to Kashyapa, twenty-seven to Chandrama, two to Angira and Krishashva 
each and remaining four daughters were married to a Kashyapa named 
Tarkshya. The entire world came to be populated by the offsprings of these 
sixty daughters of Daksha.  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit the names of Dharma's ten wives were Bhanu, 
Lamba, Kakubhi, Jami, Vishwas, Sadhya, Marutvati, Vasu, Muhurta and 
Sankalpa. Daksha's daughters Sarupa and Bhoota were the wives of Bhoot. 
Sarupa begot uncountable Rudragans, eleven of them are prominent. Bhoot's 
second wife Bhoota gave birth to formidable spooks and Ganas like Vinayak 
etc. Angira's first wife Swadha gave birth to pitragans while his second wife 
Sati accepted a VedAtharvanigra as her son. Krishashva's wife Archi begot 
Dhumrakesh, while DhishanaKrishashva's second wife gave birth to four sons- 
Vedshira, Deval, Vayun and Manu. Kashyapa named Tarkshya had four wives- 
Vinata, Kadru, Patangi and Yamini. Birds were born to Patangi, while Yamini 
gave birth to moths. Vinata's son is Garuda who is the vehicle of Lord Vishnu. 
Arun was her second son who became the charioteer of surya. Nagas (snakes) 
were born to Kadru. 
Twenty-seven daughters of Daksha were married to Chandrama (the moon). 
These are the twenty-seven Nakshatras like Kritika etc. But Chandrama had 
particular love for Rohini, so he got tuberculosis and hence could not produce 
a child. Names of Kashyapa's thirteen wives are Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kashtha, 
Ariha, Surasa, Illa, Muni, Krodh, Varsha, Tamra, Surabhi, Sarama and Timi. 

854 
 



These are the mothers of the whole world. All the Gods, demons, animals, 
giants etc. were born to them. 
INSULT OF BRIHASPATI BY THE GODS  
Shukdev says, "O Parikshit, Indra had become very haughty by the luxuries he 
received as the king of the Gods. One day, Devraj Indra was sitting on his 
throne alongwith his queen Shachi. 
His court was full of courtiers. Forty-nine Marudganas, eight Vasus, eleven 
Rudras, Aditya, Ribhuganas Vishvedev, Shadhyaganas and both Ashwini 
Kumaras were present in the court. 
Groups of Siddhas, Charaus, Gandhavas, Vidyadhars, apsaras, Kinnars, Nagas 
etc. were singing in his praise and programs of dance and music was on. 
Acharya Brihaspati, the revered teacher of the Gods arrived there. But, 
despite having seen him, Indra did not show any respect for Brihaspati. 
Indignant Brihaspati he at once deserted Devaloka (the abode of the Gods.) 
When Acharya Brihaspati had gone, Indra realized his mistake. He at once 
launched an extensive search for Guru Brihaspati. But no one could locate 
Brihaspati. Feeling of insecurity in the absence of their Guru, strongly agitated 
the Gods. On the other hand, when the demons came to know about 
Brihaspati's missing, they began to intimidate the Gods. By the permission of 
their teacher Shukracharya, the demons launched an attack on the Devaloka. 
Feeling sad by the pitiable state of the Gods. 
Indra went to the refuge of the Brahma who told the Gods that they were 
suffering because of their wrong policies and disregarding their learned Guru. 
Brahma also told the Gods that the demons had strengthened their position 
because of their loyalty to their teacher Shukarcharya. 
Brahma advised the Gods to request Vishwarup, the son of the sage Tvashta, 
to become their teacher. "He is a sound scholar of Vedas, great ascetic and 
abstentious person.”  
“Serving him," Brahma said, "You will be free from all the crisis." Following 
Brahma's advice, the Gods made Vishwarup their teacher by request. Ascetic 

855 
 



Vishwarup used his Vaishnavi Vidya to annihilate the wealth and power of the 
demons and endowed Indra, with those powers. Vishwarup also preached 
Indra about the infallible Vaishnavi Vidya. Thus securing himself under the 
shield of this knowledge Indra defeated all the demonic forces. 
Preaching of Narayana Kavach (shield) to Indra by Vishwrup The king Parikshit 
asked, " O Lord, kindly relate to me the knowledge (Vaishnavi Vidya) by the 
power of which Devraj Indra easily defeated the demons."  
Shukdev says, " Parikshit now I am telling you about the knowledge that was 
once taught to Indra by Vishwrup. So listen to it carefully with concentration. 
Whenever you feel yourself haunted with fears, you must guard you body 
with this Narayana Kavach (shield). But before that it is necessary to purify 
oneself by bath, meditation, libations, Pranayama (control of breaths) and 
eight-lettered and twelve-lettered mantras of God. The Hymnal Kavach 
(shield) must be then recited facing north while reflecting on the divine 
appearances of God. 
May the God, who rides Guruda and holds conch, wheel, mace and lotus, 
protect me from all sides. May all the incarnations of God protect me from all 
the lusts, affection and desires and in all the circumstances. Thus may I be 
protected in water by Matsyavatar, on land by Vamanavatar, in sky by 
Trivikrama, from Kamapida (sexual desire)by Sanakadit, from Kupathya 
(diseases) by Dhanvantri, from ignorance from Veda Vyasa, from the hells by 
Kachchhap avatar (tortoise incarnation), in the war by Narsinha Avatar, in the 
way by Varaha, on the top of the hills by Parashurama, during exile by Lord 
Rama along with Lakshmanaji, from Maranmohan Abhichar (death) by Lord 
Narayana, from ego by Nara, from obstacles by Dattatreya, from the bondage 
of actions by Kapila, from disregarding the God by Haygreev Mutri, from the 
crimes by Narada, from the imposters by Buddha and from the faults of Kali 
Kal may I be protected by Kalkidev. 
May I be protected in the morning with mace by Keshav, with flute by govind 
in the day, by Narayana Shakti before the noon and may I be protected with 
Sudarshan chakra by Lord Vishnu in the noon time. May the all knowing 

856 
 



omnipotent Lord protect me in every circumstances. May the name, 
appearance, vehicle, weapons, and all the services of Sri Hari protect my mind, 
intellect, organs and life from all the calamities. This Narayana Kavach (shield) 
saves one from all kind of calamities and fears. 
Killing of Vishvarup and MAKING Vajra with DADHICHI bones Vishrupa became 
the second Acharya (teacher) of the Gods. He also saw over indulgence of 
Indra in luscious objects. Vishwarup's mother belonged to demon clan, so he 
had some inclination for the demons also. Stealthily, he supplied parts of 
offerings of the oblations to the demons. Very soon, Indra too came to learn 
that their teacher Vishvarup was stealthy nurturing their enemies, the 
demons. So, indignantly Indra severed the head of Vishvarup and to get rid of 
the sin of Brahmahatya (killing of Brahmin) Indra distributed his sin among the 
land, water, tree and the woman folk, and himself escaped the sin.To take 
revenge of his son's murder, sage Tvashta organized a yagya with the purpose 
of having a son who could kill Indra. The Yagya finished successfully and as 
soon as the offering's ended, a formidable demon appeared from the altar. 
The demon was named Vritrasur. Very soon, Vritrasur defeated Indra and 
other Gods and conquered all the three worlds. Terrorized by his power and 
gallantry, all the Gods ran into the refuge of Lord Narayana. Pleased with their 
faith and prayers, Lord Narayana advised them to please the great sage 
Dadhichi and ask for his bones to build a Vajra (mace). From that Vajra 
Vritrasur could be killed, God assured them. 
Thus, all the Gods, headed by Indra, reached the hermitage of sage Dadhichi. 
There they very humbly and respectfully begged for his bones. For the benefit 
of the world, sage Dadhichi gladly accepted to donate his bones. With those 
bones, Vishvakarma built a massive Vajra which had thousand edges. Thus by 
the power of the Lord and aquiring a divine Vajra, Indra felt extremely strong. 
He at once launched an attack on the demon's armies and drove them away 
from the battlefield. 
KILLINGS OF VRITRASUR BY INDRA  

857 
 



Sri Shukdev says, "O Parikshit, from the gallantry of the Gods the demon army 
began to fled. 
Seeing his army running away in panic, Vritrasur got infuriated. Charging 
ahead he stopped the Gods' army from advancing. He roared loudly. Many of 
the Gods fainted from the frightening thunder of the roar. Advancing Vritrasur 
routed the fallen fighters. Even the earth began to shake because of his 
momentum. Devaraj Indra could not bear it. He made a powerful blow on 
Vritrasur with his mace. Vritrasur held his mace in the way and hit Airavat, 
Indra's elephant, with it. Feeling the pain of the blow, Airavat moved back. 
Then Vritrasur scolded Indra who had killed Vishvarupa the brother of 
Vritasur, "O Indra, you have killed my brother Vishvarup without any reason. 
Now, I will gore you with my powerful trident. Or you may behead me by your 
vajra. Your vajra has the power of the sage Dadhichi and the glory of Sri Hari. 
But, Indra with you vajra, I will get rid of the bondage's of my body and get 
salvation at the feet of Lord Vishnu. So kill me with your vajra." Thus, even in 
the battlefield, Vritrasur experienced direct existence of God. He prayed God! 
" O Lord, may my mind reflect constantly on your auspicious virtues, may my 
voice always recite your virtues, may my body always be in your service. I 
don't want salvation without serving you. My mind is writhing for your sight."  
Shukdev says, " Thus, O Parikshit, Vritrasur had wished to leave his body in the 
battlefield and get the God. He did not want to enjoy the luxuries of the 
heaven defeating Indra." Calling out these words, Vritrasar hit Indra with 
trident. But Indra cut that hand of Vritrasur, which was holding the trident, by 
his vajra. Losing his one hand Vritrasur was very outrageous and hit Indra's 
chin and Airavat's forehead with his elbow. Because of the blow Indra 
dropped his vajra, which fell near Vritrasur's feet. Indra was now feeling too 
ashamed to pick up the vajra. 
Vritrasur said, " O Indra, pick up the vajra and kill your enemy. It is not the 
time to be gloomy. 

858 
 



Indra showed his respect to Vritrasur for his truthfulness and undeceitful 
words, and said " O great demon you are really great. Your patience, 
determination and devotion for God are really remarkable. You have 
surmounted the illusion of God that confuses ordinary ones. You are a great 
man born in demon family. Vritrasur again raised his wheel to hit, but Indra 
cut his second hand. 
Now, having lost both his hands, Vritasur shook the earth with his heavy steps 
and swallowed Indra along with his elephant. Everyone was beginning to feel 
sorry for Indra but because of Narayana Kavach, Indra remained unhurt even 
in the belly of Vritrasur. Thereafter, Indra lacerated the demon's belly and 
came out. Then he cut Vritrasur's head also. At that moment, soul of Vritrasur 
annihilated in the Supreme Being. All the Gods then greeted Indra for his 
victory. 
Vritrasur was a religious king Chitraketu in his previous birth. Because of the 
grace of Narada and Angira, he had received detachment and supreme 
devotion and began to roam everywhere as a Siddha Purusha (one who 
achieves perfection).  
Once he was travelling on the aircraft gifted to him by the Gods, he saw the 
Ardhnarishwar (half male-half female) appearance of Lord Shiva and said 
something in derogation. 
Indignant of his discourtesy, Mata Parvati cursed Chitraketu to take birth in a 
demon clan. Because of that curse, Chitraketu appeared as demon. But even 
in demon incarnation, his devotion for the Lord's feet persisted as before. 
 
SEVENTH CHAPTER  
REMOVAL OF DOUBT ABOUT GOD'S PARTIALITY  
The king Parikshit asked, " O fortunate one, God is said to have an equal view 
for everybody. 

859 
 



Why then does He favor the Gods alone. Why does He kill the demons only? 
Thus I have some doubts regarding God's impartiality. Kindly remove them."  
Shukdev says, " Parikshit, God's sketches are so vivid that even the great sages 
can't comprehend them fully. Even then just by reciting these surprising 
sketches of God, one receives the supreme position. Accepting the virtues of 
this illusion, God acquires the opposing forms of killer and killed occasionally. 
Virtues like Satya (chastity), Rajas (royalty) and Tamas (darkness) are of 
nature, and not of God and hence keep rising and falling with time. When 
Satguna (chastity) rises, God adopts the Gods and the Sages and causes a 
surge in their number. A rise in Rajas (royal) virtues sees a surge in demons 
number. While a rise in Tama (darkness) virtues leads to a surge in the 
population of the Yaksh and Rakshasas (ogres and other super natural beings). 
But God is in fact impartial.  
Shukdev says, " O king once Devarshi Narada had related an incident to your 
grandfather Yudhisthira. I'm narrating it to you right now. Your doubts will be 
removed."  
TALE OF JAY-VIJAY  
During the Rajsuya Yagya in Yudhisthira's court, Lord Krishna had beheaded 
Shishupal with His wheel. Everyone, including Yudhisthira saw Shishupal's soul 
annihilating in Lord Krishna. 
Surprised Yudhisthira had asked Narada then, " O Devarshi, isn't it surprising 
that Shishupal who was so jealous of Lord Krishna, got merged in Him? Such 
fortune is even rare for the great Yogis (ascetics). How did then this rival of 
God get such a supreme fortune?" Narada said, "O king criticism, praise, 
serving or negligence are all confined to the body only. 
When the soul is identified with the body, people suffer from the impact of 
scolding and abusing. God has no ego like ordinary beings, because He is the 
supreme soul and ultimate. If He punishes someone it is for one's benefit and 
not for any anger or jealousy. Therefore one must concentrate his mind in 
God no matter what his feelings are- enmity, devotion, fear, affection. 

860 
 



In God's view these feelings don't make any difference." Narada said, " 
Yudhisthira, in my opinion it is certain that the concentration achieved 
through a feeling of enmity is rare to achiev otherwise, even with devotion. 
This is the reason why uncountable number of sinners, who had strong enmity 
for Lord Krishna, merged with Him. Your cousins- Shishupal and Dantavkra 
were fortunate. They both were the gatekeepers of the Lord. It was by curse 
of Brahmin, that they had to be relegated and take birth as sinful demons." 
Narada said, "O king, Brahma's Manasputras (sons begotten by thoughts) 
Sanakadikumars were freely roaming all over the universe.  
Once they reached Vaikunth (the abode of Lord Vishnu). But assuming them 
to be ordinary boys the gatekeepers Jay-Vijay did not allow them in. 
Indignant by the behaviour of the Gatekeepers, Sanakadi Kumars cursed 
them: "Fools both of you don't deserve a presence near God. Both of you are 
endowed with Rajaguna and Tamoguna (royal and dark virtues), so go and 
take birth as the demons." When both the gatekeepers were falling from 
Vaikunth, the kind Sanakadi Kumars said, " O.K. the effect of our curse shall 
long for your three births only, thereafter you shall return to Vaikunth again."  
TALE OF HIRANYAKSH AND HIRANYKASHIPU  
By the curse of Brahmins, the gatekeepers of the God, Jay-Vijay took their first 
birth as the demons- Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksh. Diti was their mother. 
Hiranyaksh had stolen the earth and hidden it in Sutala Loka, causing worries 
for Brahma. To remove the worries of Brahma, Lord appeared as Varaha 
avatar (the boar incarnation) and killed Hiranyaksh. After the killing of 
Hiranyaksh his elder brother Hiraykashipu developed enmity with Lord Vishnu. 
He avowed to other demons: "I will kill that tricky Vishnu with my trident. 
Thus no one will be able to protect the Gods. All of you go out and bring havoc 
on them." Then Hiranykashipu cremated his younger brother Hiranyaksh, 
condoled mother Aditi and wife of his younger brother and himself went away 
to observe penance in order to acquire strength and gallantry. 

861 
 



In the Valley of Mandarachal Mountain, Hiranykashipu stood on one toe only 
and raised his hands towards sky. He continued to stand in the same position. 
Ultimately fire began to emerge from his head. That fire caused burning of all 
the three lokas (worlds.) Panicked by the fire the Gods reached to Brahma and 
prayed to put the fire off. Brahma at once appeared before Hiranykashipu and 
said, "Son Hiranykashipu, your penance is over now. Now seek a boon of your 
wish.' Worshipping Brahma, Hiranykashipu said: 'May I not be killed by any 
living being created by you, may I be killed neither in day nor in night, neither 
by humans nor by animals, neither by weapons nor by arms, neither on earth 
nor in sky. May no one match me in war. May I be an undisputed emperor of 
all the living beings.' Pleased by his penance, Brahma granted Hiranykashipu 
that rare boon.By the virtue of Brahma's boon, Hiranykashipu grew extremely 
strong. Now he had no fear of death, so his atrocities increased day by day. He 
defeated all the Gods, human beings, demons, demiGods. Everyone accepted 
his superiority. Now, Hiranykashipu began to reside in heaven itself. He also 
made an all round declaration: 'all the people who worship or even remember 
Vishnu, shall be put to death in my kingdom. Nobody else is God except me.' 
Thus all the Gods and demons began to worship Hiranykashipu and presented 
him with gifts to please him. 
Gandharvas, Siddhas, sages, apsaras etc. all began to sing in his praise. 
Narada says: 'O Yudhisthira, Hiranykashipu had such a brilliance that he began 
to receive the offerings himself of the Yagyas performed by Brahmins. On all 
the seven islands and upto the heaven, it was his dominion. Now he was freely 
and lavishly enjoying all the luxuries. Maddened by the luxuries, he even 
began to violate the rulings of the scriptures. Perplexed by his harsh rule, all 
the Gods went into the refuge of the Almighty. Through a celestial voice, God 
comforted them: 'Don't be afraid O Gods. I am aware of havoc caused by this 
demon. I will destroy him, you wait for some more time. When he will begin 
to torment his calm and devotee son Prahlada, I will definitely kill him.' The 
demon king Hiranykashipu had four sons. Prahlada was youngest of them. 
Prahlada was the greatest lover and devotee of God. Hiranykashipu had 

862 
 



declared such a pious son like Prahlada a criminal of the state. Thus he tried 
his best to kill Prahlada. 
STORY OF PRAHLADA THE GREAT DEVOTEE  
Pious virtues of Prahlada: - The youngest son of the demon king 
Hiranykashipu, Prahlada was very virtuous. He used to serve the sages with 
love. He treated all the beings equally and did never differentiate them as 
separate from him. He had a respect for the elders. Despite having knowledge, 
wealth, beauty, and nobility, Prahlada didn't have any ego. He never lost 
patience even in most adverse conditions. He also regarded the world as false 
and worthless. He had no desire for anything, but had full restraint on his 
mind, organ, breath, and body. Despite having born in demon family, he didn't 
have any demonic virtues. Narada says: 'O Yudhisthira, as the virtues of the 
God are endless, similarly the virtues of Prahlada had no limit. But a natural 
and congenital love for Lord Sri Krishna was his greatest merit. 
Since his childhood, Prahlada had no inclination for childish plays. Often he 
used to meditate silently. During his meditation, he used to become quite 
motionless. More than often he felt as if God himself was fondling him taking 
him in His lap. At times when he experienced an absence of God, Prahlada 
would cry loudly, and at other times he would laugh with joy seeing God 
before him. He also used to sing, shout and even dance whenever he felt God 
nearby. 
Occasionally, Prahlada used to mimic God, or feeling the soft touch of God, sit 
peacefully without movement. Such was the trance like condition of Prahlada 
who had a complete submersion in devotion for God. 
Shukracharya was the teacher of the demons. Sukhracharya's two sons had 
been appointed to teach the boys of the royal family. Staying at a place closer 
to the royal palace, these two brothers taught the boys in politics, economics 
etc. Prahlada too was sent to them for formal education. There he used to 
listen to his teachers carefully and recite what he had been taught. But 
Prahlada did not like the education, which was based on falsehood. One day 

863 
 



Hiranykashipu took Prahlada in his lap and asked lovingly: 'My son, tell me, 
what you like the most.' Prahlada said: 'Father, in my opinion, this world is 
nothing but full of sorrow. Hence it is just for every being that they should give 
up this blind-pit like world and go to the forests and take shelter in God, to be 
free of miseries.' Alarmed by these words, Hiranykashipu warned the 
teachers, the sons of Shukracharya, to look after Prahlada well, and to remove 
that mean thoughts of devotion from his mind. He also cautioned the teachers 
to guard Prahlada against any possible approach by a God, ascetic or Brahmin. 
Guruputras (the teacher of Prahlada) tried their best and trained Prahlada in 
policies of Sama, Dama, Dand, Bhed (conviction, temptation, fear of 
punishment and partiality.) Then they trained him in Arth, Dharma and Kama 
(economic matters, religion and carnal knowledge.) When they felt satisfied 
with their efforts the Guruputras brought Prahald again to his father, the 
demon king Miranykasipu. 
Hiranykashipu kissed Prahlada's head and took him in his lap and asked, "My 
son Prahlada, tell me in detail what you have learned from your teacher 
during your stay with them." Prahlada said, "Father there are nine kinds of 
devotion for Lord Vishnu. If one develops these nine kinds of devotion with 
dedication, I understand, it would be the best education." Infuriated by these 
words, Hiranykashipu threw Prahlada on the floor and began to scoff at 
Guruputras. 
Hearing his father scoffing at Guruputras, Prahlada said, "Father it was not 
taught to me by them, it is my natural inclination." These words further 
infuriated Hiranykashipu. Blinded by anger he ordered his soldiers to kill 
Prahlada at once. Formidable demons hit Prahlada with their arms. At that 
time Prahlada's conscience was focused in God. All the blows of the demons 
yielded no result. Thereafter, Prahlada was trampled by intoxicated elephants, 
bitten by poisonous snakes thrown from the high cliffs into the sea and even 
in fire, buried under the mountain but all in vain. None of the attempts could 
do any harm to the sinless Prahlada. 

864 
 



Now, Hirankashipu began to feel worried because of his inability. Seeing him 
worried the teacher assured him, "Be free of worries, O king. Keep your son 
tied in Varunapash (the noose of Varuna) until our father Shukracharya 
returns." Then they again took Prahlada to their hermitage to teach him 
Grihasthdharm (duties of a married man). One day the teachers were away for 
some urgent work. Prahlada called his classmates and began to preach them 
about Lord Vishnu. 
Preaching to Demon Boys by Prahlada Prahlada preached, "Friends, human 
incarnation is a rare thing in this world. So taking shelter at the feet of God in 
this human incarnation is a success for life. Brothers, God is the friend, 
beloved and the soul of each and every being. Sensual pleasures are easily 
available in every incarnation, so it is useless to make physical efforts to 
achieve sensual pleasures. But this human body is a means to get God. So, as 
long as the body is sound and healthy and it has strength one must work for 
his benefits. 
Half of the life of a man is simply wasted in sleeping. First twenty years pass in 
playing, Young age passes in satisfying the ego while during the twenty years 
of old age human body becomes crippled. So friends don't waste your life 
running after the physical pleasures, luxuries, wealth and all that leads to a 
certain fall. One needs not work hard to please the God. He is soul of every 
living being. He is self-achieved. Only do good to every living being, be kind to 
them unconditionally. 
God is pleased with these actions only. Impressed by the beautiful preaching 
of Prahlada about Bhagavat Dharma, the demon boys asked, "O prince, you 
have never been away from the hermitage. How then did you get such a 
knowledge at such a raw age? Prahlada told his fellow disciples that when his 
father was away on Mandarachal for penance, Indra had kidnapped his 
mother Kayadhu. He was taking her to Devloka when Devarshi Narada 
stopped him in the way and asked why he was taking such a helpless woman 
so forcibly. Indra had told then that he would destroy her foetus who was 
going to be a demon and thereafter would let her go. 

865 
 



Narada had said, "Devaraj there is a great devotee of God in this foetus, you 
cannot kill him. But you need not fear him." Thus convinced by Narada, Indra 
had released Kayadhu who then came to stay at Narada's hermitage to pass 
her time. In the pious company of Narada who, with a desire to benefit my 
mother and me, had preached us about Bhagavat dharma, and absolute 
knowledge (Vishuddha Jnana)." It is that knowledge which I have preached 
you just now. God is pleased with unconditional love only. So you too develop 
devotion for God."  
 
CHAPTER EIGHT  
DESCRIPTION OF MANVATARAS 
(1) Swayambhu Manvantra-  
King Parikshit said to Shukdev, "Gurudev, I just heard that tale of self-begotten 
Manu's lineage. Now kindly describe to me about the others Manus. Also 
describe the plays of God's different incarnations which occurred during 
different Manvantaras." Shukdev said, "Parikshit, during Tamas Manvantara, 
Lord Narayana was born as Hari incarnation from Harini, the wife of a sage. In 
that incarnation He saved an elephant from the jaws of a crocodile. 
During the present Kalpa (period comprising the sum of all the four yugas), six 
Manvantaras have passed. I have described the first one. Now, listen to the 
description of the other Manvantaras." 
(2) Swarochish Manvantara-  
Swarochi Manu was the son of Agni. He had sons named Dyumana, Sushena 
and Rochismana. During that Manvantara, Indra's post was occuppied by 
Rochan. 
Scholars of Vedas like Vrajstambh etc. were among the SaptaRishi (seven 
great sages). Lord had taken incarnation as Vibhu, the son of a sage Vedshira 
and his wife Tushita. Vibhu remained a loyal celibate lifelong. Following His 
conduct, eighty-eight thousand more sages observed celibacy life long. 

866 
 



(3) Uttam Manvantara-  
Third Manu Uttam was the son of the king Priyvrata. He had sons named 
Pawan, Sanjay, Yagyhotra, etc. In that Manvantar, seven sons of the sage 
Vashisht were SaptaRishi (the seven great sages). Indra's name was Satyajit. 
Satya, Vedshrut and Bhadra were the main Ganas (courtiers) of the God. God 
had appeared in the incarnation of Satyasen, the son of Dharma and Sunrita. 
He was accompanied by Devganas named Satyvrata. Lord had destroyed 
during that period the evil Yakshas, demon and poltergeists. 
(4) Tamas Manvantara-  
Tamas, the fourth Manu was the real brother of Uttam, the third Manu. 
He had ten sons. TRishikh was Indra then, with Satyak, Hari, Veer etc. as his 
main courtiers. Sage like Jyotirdham etc. were the SaptaRishi. During that 
Manvantara Lord had saved Gajendra from the jaws of the crocodile. 
(5) Raiwat Manvantara:  
Raiwas was the fifth Manu. He was also the real brother of Tamas, the third 
Manu. He had many sons. Vibhu was the name of Indra. Sages like 
Hiranyroma, Vedshira, Urdhubahm were among SaptaRishi. God had 
appeared in the incarnation of Vaikunth the son of the sage Shubh and his 
wife Vikuntha. At the request of Goddess Lakshmi, Lord Vaikunth created 
Vaikunth dham, the best among all other lokas (worlds). 
(6) Chakshush Manvantara:  
Chakshush was the sixth Manu. He had sons named Puru, Purusha, Sadyumn 
etc. Mantrradruma was Indra then, with Apya etc. as main courtiers. Sages 
like Havishmana and Veeraka etc. were among the SaptaRishi. During that 
Manuantara, Lord had appeared in partial incarnation as Ajit, the son of 
Vanraj and his wife Sambhunti. It was he who caused the churning of the sea 
and made the God's drink nectar and supported Mandarachal Mountain on his 
back in Kachchhap (tortoise) from during the churning. 
(7) Vaivasvata Manvantara:  

867 
 



Sri Shukdev says, " Parikshit in the present era, the seventh Manu, Shardhdev 
is the son of Surya. He has ten sons- Ikshvaku, Nabhag, Drisht, Sharyati, 
Narishyanta, Nabhag, Disht, Karush, Prishadhra and Vasumana. Puranadar is 
the name of Indra. He has Aditya, Vasu, Rudra, Vishvadev, Marudgana, 
Ashwini, Kumar and Rishi as his main courtiers. 
Kashyapa, Atri, Vashishtha, Vishvamitra, Gautam, Jamadagni and Bhardwaj are 
the SaptaRishi. 
During this Manvantara, God has arrived in Vamana incarnation as the son of 
Kashyapa and his wife Aditi. 
(8) Savarni Manvantara:  
Savarni, the son of Surya and Chhaya would be the eighth Manu. The king 
Surath, who had occurred in Swarachish Manvantara, had worshiped Goddess 
Bhagavati intensely, and thus received a boon of having an unbroken empire 
on earth. In later course he will be the son of Surya and become the eighth 
Manu also. He would have sons like Nirmaka, Virajask etc. Vairochana Bali 
would be Indra, Amritprabha etc. as his main courtiers. Galava, Diptimana, 
Parashurama, Ashwatthama, Kripacharya, RishySring and Vyasa- these great 
sages would be the SaptaRishi during the eight Manvantara. God would take 
incarnation as Sarvbhaum, the sons of Devguhya and his wife Saraswati. God 
as Sarvbhaum would snatch the kingdom of Swarga (heaven) from Puranadara 
Indra and give it to the king Bali. 
(9) Ninth Manvantara:  
Sri Shukdev says, Varuna's son Dakshasavarni would be the ninth Manu. 
He would have sons like Bhutaketu, Diptketu, Dyutimana etc. God would take 
birth as the incarnation of Rishabh, the son of sage Ayushmana and his wife 
Ambudhara. A person named Adbhut would be Indra and he would have Para, 
Marichigarbh etc. as his main courtiers. 
(10) The Tenth Manvantara:  

868 
 



Upshloksa's son Brahma Savarni would be the tenth Manu. He would be very 
pious in nature and have sons like Bhurishen etc. Havishmana, Sukriti, Satya, 
Jay, Murti etc. would be SaptaRishi. Shambhu would be Indra, with Suvasana, 
Viruddh etc. as his main courtiers. God would appear in the incarnation of 
Vishwasen as the son of Vishwasrij and his wife Vishuchi. He would be a friend 
of Indra. 
(11) The Eleventh Manvantara:  
The self-restraining Dharmasavarni would be the eleventh Manu. 
He would have ten sons. Vaidhrita would be Indra with Vihangama, 
Kamagama, etc. as main courtiers. Vedic sages like Arun etc. would be the 
SaptaRishi. God would appear as Dharmasetu, the sons of Aryak and 
Vaidhrita. In this incarnation he would protect Triloki (all the three worlds). 
(12) Twelveth Manvantra:  
Rudrasavarni would be the twelfth Manu. He would have sons named 
Devavana, Updev and Devshreshth etc. Ritdhama would be Indra with Hari 
etc. as his main courtiers. As the son of Satyasahay and his wife Sunrita, the 
God would protect this Manvantara in the form of Swadham. 
(13) Thirteenth Manvantara:  
Devsavarni would be the thirteenth Manvantara. He would have sons named 
Chitrasen, Vichitra etc. Divaspati would be Indra of the Gods like Sukarm, 
Sutram etc. Sages like Nirmoka, Tatvadarsh etc. would be the SaptaRishi. God 
would appear as Yogeshwar, the sons of Devhotra and his wife Brihati. He 
would bestow the designation of Indra to Divaspati. 
(14) Fourteenth Manvantara:  
Indrasavarmi would be the fourteenth Manu. He would have sons like Uru, 
Gambhir Buddhi etc. Shuchi would be Indra and have Pavitra Chakshush etc. 
as his main courtiers. Agni, Bahu, Shuchi, Magadh etc. would be the 
SaptaRishi. God would appear in the incarnation of Brihadbhahu as the son of 

869 
 



Satrayana and his wife Vinata and cause the extension of Karmakand 
(actions)."  
Shukdev says, "O Parikshit, these fourteen Manvantaras had continued in 
past, are continuing in the present and they would continue in the future also. 
It is by them, that a Kalpa (a period of thousand Chaturyugas) is completed. 
Calculation of time is also done through these Manvantaras. 
Period of a Manvantra is slightly more then seventy one Chaturyugas (all the 
four yugas passing seventy-one times). A Chaturyugaya (period of all the four 
yugas taken together) lasts for about 3 million years, while a Kalpa lasts for 
about four thousand three hundred and twenty million years. This is equal to 
a day of Brahma. Brahma's night is Mahapralaya (the great deluge). When that 
night is over, Brahma again begins the work of new creation exactly as per the 
previous Kalpa. Carrying out this responsibility continuously for a century, 
Brahma goes back to Bhagavat dham (the abode of Lord Vishnu). His 
responsibilities are taken over by the next Brahma, who carries out the work 
of creation, by the inspiration of Lord Narayana. 
TALE OF GAJENDRA THE ELEPHANT and GRAH, THE CROCODILE 
King Parikshit asked, "Munivar, God had save Gajendra, in His Hari 
incarnation. I wish to hear this tale."  
Shukdev says, " O king, in Tamas Manvantara, God had appeared as Hari and 
saved Gajendra from the jaws of Grah the crocodile. I am narrating the tale to 
you listen to it carefully. 
Surrounded by Kshirsagar, there was a high mountain named Trikuta. In the 
dense forest on the mountain there lived Gajendra along with his harem of 
many cows. Gajendra was the king of many big and strong elephants. 
One day, Gajendra was passing his time playfully with his family in the forests. 
It was very hot that day. So, perplexed by the sun, Gajendra descended down 
the mountain with his family. At the foothills, there was a big lake with deep, 
cold water and many lotuses blooming in it. 

870 
 



Gajendra entered the lake and drank water to his fill. Then he took bath and 
started to play in the water. His activities in the water disturbed the crocodile 
who lived there. With anger, the crocodile caught hold of Gajendra's leg. 
Startled by the sudden attack, Gajendra put all his might to get free but in 
vain. They only jostled against each other for long. Every moment, crocodile's 
strengths seemed to be gaining. At last, because of constant pulling into 
water, Gajendra's strength gave away. Now, he was very desperate and 
thought that God has sent the crocodile as a noose of Yama (death) for him. 
This thought horrified the elephant, so he decided to take refuge at Sri Hari. 
Gajendra had the memory of his previous birth fresh. So concentrating his 
mind in the beautiful appearance of God, he began to pray, "I take refuge at 
God, who is the base of the entire world, who is the ultimate refuge for 
everyone. It is difficult to unfold the mysteries of His plays. He takes many 
guises. Not even the sages and the Gods know His appearance and glory. May 
such a Lord protect me. O Lord, your powers are unending. You are gracious 
to those who take refuge in you. Illusioned by you, this humble creature does 
not recognize you. O Lord, I am in your refuge."  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, Gajendra had prayed God impartially and 
unspecifically so other Gods did not come to save him. Being the soul of 
everyone, Lord Sri Hari appeared Himself and saw Gajendra in deep crisis. 
When Gajendra saw that Lord Sri Hari had arrived on his vehicle Garuda from 
the sky, he picked a lotus from the lake and raised it in his trunk and said, "O 
Jagadishwar (God of all world) Narayana, here is a salutation for you." By then 
Lord jumped down from the Garuda and dragged both of them out of water. 
Then He tore the jaws of the crocodile by his wheel and saved Gajendra. All 
the Gods, Brahma and Lord Shiva worshiped God and showered flowers on 
Him. 
Previous Births of Gaja and Grah Killed by the God, the crocodile at once 
acquired a divine appearance. He was a good-natured Gandharva (demiGod) 
named Huhu, in his previous birth. By the curse of Mahatma Deval, he had to 
take birth in crocodile form. But now, by the grace of God he was saved and 

871 
 



went to his heavenly abode. Gajendra too received salvation by mere touch of 
God. He too went to the heavenly abode of God.In his previous birth, 
Gajendra was a king of Pandya dynasty. His name was Indradyumna. He was a 
fervent devotee of God. So he had abandoned his kingdom and taken to 
penance on Malay Mountain. One day he was engrossed in his worship when 
sage Agastya arrived there with his disciples. For not getting due welcome 
from the king, Agastya cursed him, "You with a dull mind, who neglect his 
guests will be born as an elephant." But even in elephant incarnation, and by 
the virtues of his devotion, Gajendra retained the memory of his previous 
birth. God appointed him as his courtier and departed to his divine abode 
riding on Garuda."  
CHURNING OF THE SEA  
King Parikshit asked, "O great sage, how did God cause churning of the sea. 
What was the purpose behind it? Kindly tell me?"  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, in the sixth Chakshush Manvantara, the demons king 
Bali had defeated the Gods. 
Indra had also lost his glory by insulting the garland which sage Durvasa had 
presented to him as a God's gift. Indra had put the garland in elephant's neck 
and then got it crushed under its feet. 
But now having lost his kingdom and struck by misfortune, Indra and other 
Gods with Brahma prayed to the Lord. Melted by their prayers, God appeared 
before them. All the Gods laid before Him and worshiped. The omnipotent 
God inspired the Gods to churn the sea. 
Lord asked the Gods to churn the sea and produce nectar. He also advised 
them to take the help of demons in that great task. Drinking the nectar one 
becomes immortal. God asked the Gods to put various medicinal plants and 
vegetations in Kshirsagar (sea of milk) and churn it by Mandarachal Mountain 
moving it with the help of Vasuki the naga. God promised them of all help 
from His part. 

872 
 



Thereafter, Indra and other Gods went unarmed to the demon king Bali and 
told him of their intention. Demons too liked the idea. With a friendly attitude 
then the Gods and the demons together uprooted the mount Mandarachal. 
But they could not carry it to the sea. Lord appeared on Garuda and carried 
the mountain to the sea. 
The Gods and demons had promised Vasuki, the Naga his due share in the 
nectar. So Vasuki allowed them to use him as a rope, wound around 
Mandarachal as a means to move it. In the incarnation of Ajit, Lord told the 
Gods to hold the head of Vasuki. But the demons suspecting some mischief 
said they would hold the head and asked the Gods to hold the Naga from the 
tail for churning. Thus the Gods held the tail while the demons took hold of 
Vasuki's head. 
Thus they began the churning. But as soon as the churning began the 
mountain started sinking for not having a firm base. Lord then took Kachchhap 
(tortoise) incarnation and supported Mandarachal on His back. On the 
mountain also Lord appeared in Sahastrabahu form, and held it. The Gods and 
the demons churned the sea for long but nothing emerged. So, Lord Ajit 
himself began to churn the sea. First of all, it was Halahal, the deadly poison to 
emerg. The intensity of the poison began to torment every being. To save 
their subjects from it, Prajapatis prayed Lord Lord Shiva. The life-giver, Lord 
Bholenath (an epithet of Lord Shiva) drank all the poison. By the impact of the 
poison, Lord Lord Shiva's throat turned blue in color. Hence Lord Shiva got the 
name Nilakantha.Emergence of Gems and Nectar: After Lord Shiva drank the 
poison, the Gods and the demons began to churn the sea again with greater 
enthusiasm. Now, Kamadhenu, the divine cow emerged. She was useful for 
Yagya etc. so the sages received it. Then a horse named Uchchaishrava, 
emerged and taken up by Bali the king of demons. The horse was followed by 
Airavat the elephant. Indra took it. The divine gem, Kaustubh Mani, emerged 
then. Lord Ajit took it on His chest. Then emerged the Kalpavriksha, the divine 
tree that reached the heavens. 
Then the apsaras emerged. They all accepted to serve Indra in Heaven. 

873 
 



Goddess Lakshmi emerged after the apsaras. All the azimuths were lighted 
because of her brilliance. Everyone was attracted towards her beauty, 
generosity, youthfulness, appearance and glory. Devaraj Indra presented a 
throne for her to sit. Rivers brought water for her ceremonial bath. The earth 
presented medicinal bath. Cows gave Panchganyas and Vasant (spring) 
presented many kinds of fruits and flowers. The sages welcomed Lakshmi with 
Rigsuktas (hymns of Rigveda). Gandharvas sang in her praise. Then taking the 
lotus in her hand, Lakshmi took a seat on the throne. Sea donned her with a 
beautiful silk saree. Varuna presented a garland. Saraswati gifted her with a 
necklace of pearls. Brahma presented lotus while Nagas presented two 
earrings. 
After the singing by Brahmins in her praise, Lakshmi took lotus garland in her 
hand and put it around Lord Vishnu's neck in a gesture of accepting Him as her 
husband. Jagatpita, Lord Vishnu too gave Lakshmi a supreme position in His 
heart. Lakshmi was followed by Varunai who was taken up by the demons. 
The Gods and the demons began to churn the sea again. At last Lord 
Dhanvantari emerged with an urn of nectar. It was Dhanvantari who 
developed Ayurved, the ancient Indian system of medicine. As soon as the 
demons saw the urn, they snatched it and ran away. A row then began among 
the demons over the drinking of nectar. Consoling the Gods, Lord appeared 
among the demons in the guise of an extremely pretty woman, Mohini. 
Distribution of Nectar by Lord as Mohini: The demons who were fighting over 
the potions of nectar forgot everything when they saw Mohini, who was 
actually a guise of Lord Vishnu. Lured by her prettiness the demons came to 
Mohini and requested her to solve the dispute for them. 
Illusioned by God, the demons even gave the nectar to Mohini and sat 
peacefully showing their confidence in her. In Mohini's guise, Lord thought 
that the demons were congenitally cruel and giving nectar to them would be 
akin to feeding sakes with milk. Their evils would increase. 

874 
 



So, Mohini offered the nectar to the Gods only while offered wine to the 
demons. When the nectar was being distributed, a demon named Rahu took 
the guise of a God and sitting among them drank the nectar. Suurya and 
Chandra spotted him and revealed his identity to God, who at once beheaded 
him. But, by then Rahu had drunk enough nectar. 
CONQUERING OF HEAVEN BY KING BALI  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit by the virtues of the ambrosia, the Gods had become 
invincible. They began to take revenge and the demon king Bali met his death 
in the battle. When Brahma saw the imminent extermination of the demons, 
he sent Devarshi Narada in the battlefield to make the Gods abstain from the 
war. The survivng demons carried the dead Bali towards Astachal. There, 
Shukracharya, the teacher of the demons, resurrected all the demons with his 
Sanjivani Vidya (knowledge that resurrects the dead). Thus obligated the 
demon-king Bali dedicated all his wealth to Shukracharya and began to serve 
him and other Brahmins of Bhirgu clan. 
By the service of the Demons the Brahmins of Bhrigu clan got very much 
pleased. King Bali had a long cherished desire of conquering the heaven. So 
the Brahmins organized a Vishvjit Yagya for Bali. At the completion of Yagya, 
first emerged a beautiful chariot, all covered with gold. 
Then green coloured horses, inexhaustible quiver and a divine shield emerged 
in sequence from the altar. Bali's grandfather Prahlada presented him a 
garland while Shukracharya gave a conch. 
Thus receiving all the weaponaries, king Bali took oath and circumambulated 
Brahmins. 
Thereafter, greeting them he boarded the chariot followed by powerful 
demons and their huge armies. Thus fully prepared Bali launched a massive 
attack on the heaven. 
When Indra saw that Bali had come with full preparation and that his armies 
had surrounded Amaravati, he went to his teacher Brihaspati and asked about 
the reason for the demons' sudden uprising. Devguru said, "Indra, blessing of 

875 
 



Bhrigu Brahmins is the main reason of the demons uprising. You can't face the 
demon armies yet, because Kal himself is in their favor. So you all abandon the 
heaven and hide somewhere." After the abdication of the heaven by the Gods 
Bali captured it. Then he conquered all the three worlds. With advice of his 
priests, Bali organized one hundred Ashvmegh Yagyas. Thus by the grace of 
Shukracharya and other Brahmins of Bhrigu clan, king Bali got the domain of 
the heaven and began to rule it generously. 
Preaching of Payovrata to Aditi by Kashyapa: Sri  
Shukdev says, "O Parikshit, Aditi (mother of the Gods) felt very sorry for the 
Gods and capture of the heaven by the demons. When Sage Kashyapa visited 
Aditi's hermitage, he saw his wife in desperate mood. On enquiring about the 
reason, Aditi said, " Lord by your grace my married life is running well. But I 
am sorry for the pitiable condition of my sons, the Gods. Strong demons have 
snatched their abode. So kindly tell me the remedy." At her request Kashyapa 
preached Aditi about a worship named "Payovrat" to seek the blessing God. 
This worship, Payovrat is carried out during the waxing phase of the month 
Phalgun (that correspond to February-March months in Gregorian calendar) 
for twelve days continuously. One must drink milk only during the worship. 
One-day before starting the Vrat, that is on the day of Amavasya (moonless 
night) one must smear his body with the earth dug out by the boars and take 
bath in the river. Then, one must worship God with Shodushopchar (sixteen 
treatments) while following the rules prescribed for daily routine. He must 
recite Dwadashakshari Mantra (hymn containing twelve letters), perform 
Havan with Kheer (rice cooked in milk) and distribute Naivadya (remaining 
food from Havan) among the devotees. Reciting the twelve-lettered hymn, 
one must tell the rosary-string at least once about the wish. Thus, the same 
worship must be performed for twelve days continuously. If one feeds a 
Brahmin daily during the Vrat, he can be sure of God's grace. 
Mother of the Gods, Aditi performed Payovrat as per the advice of her 
husband Kashyapa. 

876 
 



Pleased by her Vrat, the Lord appeared before her in Chaturbhuj (four-armed) 
form. Mother Aditi laid flat on the ground to greet the God. She prayed, "O 
Lord you are the God of Yagya, and Yagya yourself. Those, who take refuge at 
your feet are saved when you are pleased, nothing remains ungettable." Lord 
said, " O mother of the Gods, I know about your desire. You have worshipped 
me for your sons, But it is difficult yet to defeat the demons. But because of 
your worship, I will protect your sons by becoming your child." Vamana 
incarnation of God When the Lord arrived in Aditi's womb, Brahma prayed to 
Him. By Brahma's prayers, the unborn God appeared before Aditi.  
Shukdev says, " O Parikshit, on the twelfth day of the waxing phase of 
Bhadrapada month (corresponding to September) Lord tok birth in Abhijit 
Muhurta. 
Everywhere, everybody celebrated the arrival of God with joy. The Gods 
showered flowers on Him. The God had arrived in Vamana (dwarf) form. His 
continence appearance caused tremendous joy for the sages. During Upnayan 
consecration of Lord, the ruling deity of the Gayatri mantra, Savitri (an epithet 
for Surya) preached Him the hymn. Guru gave him Yagyopavit, Kashyapa gave 
neck-kerchief, the earth gave black buck skin, Chandra gave scepter, Mother 
gave loin cloth, the sky gave umbrella, Brahma gave Kamandalu (coconut shell 
bowl) SaptRishi gave kush (sacred grass) while Goddess Saraswati presented 
God with a string of Rosaries. Yakshraj (king of Yakshas) Kubera gave him the 
alms bowl and mother Annapurnna gave him alms. Thus everyone payed due 
respect to God in Vamana (dwarf) incarnation who was radiating with divine 
glory. 
Lord Vamana was intimated that the king Bali was performing many 
Ashvamegha Yagyas with Bhrigu Brahmans. He at once left for the Yagya site, 
at a place named Bhrigu Kachch on the banks of the river Narmada. As soon as 
Lord Vamana reached the site, all the sages, hosts and others present there 
became dull before the radiance of God. They felt as if Surya himself had 
arisen there. Everyone stood up to welcome God. Host Bali offered Him the 

877 
 



best seat and washed His feet with affection. Then Bali requested God for his 
service. 
Demanding three steps of land by Vamana: King Bali requested, "O Brahmin, 
now tell me how I can serve you. You are the tangible representation of the 
penance of BrahmaRishis. By your arrival, all my ancestors are saved, my clan 
is blessed, my Yagya has succeeded. Ask me whatever you wish. I am ready to 
give you your desired object." Hearing the pious talk of the king Bali, Lord 
Vamana blessed him and said, "O king, no one have been impatient and frugal 
in your clan. Reputation of your grandfather Prahlada is still alive. 
You great grandfather Hiranykashipu had chased the illusionary Vishnu who 
had hid in your great grandfather's heart itself. When the infuriated 
Hiranykashipu could not find Vishnu anywhere in all the three worlds, he 
presumed that Vishnu had died because of his fear alone.”  
“O king" continued Lord Vamana, " You are excellent among the religious 
people. O demon king, you can fulfill any great desire. But I demand only as 
much land as could be covered in three steps of mine. I need nothing else." 
King Bali said, " O Batu, (dwarf Brahmin) you talk like aged persons but your 
mind is childish. I am the ruler of all the three worlds, and you are asking for 
three steps of land only, you can still ask for anything else. Lord Vamana 
replied," O king, greedy ones are not sated even if they get whole of the earth. 
But I don't want more than my requirement." King Bali agreed to donate 
Vamana the Land as per his demands and picked up the water pot to make 
resolution.When Guru Shukracharya, saw that Bali had agreed to donate land, 
he tried to persuade him, "O Bali, this Vamana is none other than 
indestructible Lord Vishnu. He has taken incarnation of Vamana as a son of 
Aditi, Kashyapa's wife, in the interest of the Gods. Unknowingly you have 
made a promise to fulfil His desire. But He will snatch everything from you and 
hand it over to Indra. This illusionary Batu will measure whole of your empire 
in all the three worlds with his two steps, so you will not be able to keep your 
promise also. Hence, show your inability to make donation as per His demand, 
send Him back." Measuring of Earth's heaven by Vamana:  

878 
 



Shukdev says, "Parikshit with, politeness king Bali asserted to his teacher, " 
Gurudev, your words are true. But I am the grandson of great Prahlada. 
Now I cannot reverse my promise. No religion is greater than truth. I'm not 
afraid of any calamity except of deceiving a Brahmin." When, Shukracharya 
saw that his disciple Bali was determined to violate his dictate, he cursed, " O 
king, soon you will be devoid of the wealth you have been enjoying." But 
despite having been cursed by his teacher, Bali stayed firm to his promise. 
Worshipping Vamana formally, he took some water on his palm and made the 
promise to donate land. As soon as Bali made the promise, Lord Vamana 
assumed a gigantic appearance and measured Bali's entire empire in his steps. 
In first He measured the whole of the earth. In the next He measured the 
heaven. The second step itself reached Satyaloka, where Brahma had once 
washed Lord's feet and kept the water, in a Kamandalu (a bowl of coconut 
shell) that came on earth later as the river Ganges. Now there was no room 
for God to put His third step. Lord ridiculed Bali for not keeping his promise 
fully, "Your everything is mine now, but your promise is still incomplete. 
Shukdev says Lord ridiculed Bali but he remained unmoved with patience. He 
said: 'O Lord, I keep my promise fully, you put your third step on my head. I 
don't want a blemish on my reputation.' Lord said: 'I snatch all the wealth 
from people who are bestowed with my grace. 
They then become an inseparable devotee of me, free from every blemish.' 
Thus Lord Vishnu gave Bali the empire of Sutal Loka (Hades) that was even 
richer than the heaven and said: 'I will protect you there from all the 
obstacles.' Your hundredth Ashvamudh Yagya shall be completed. 
In due course of time you shall be the king of the heaven.' This way, without 
fighting a battle, Lord took the empire of heaven from the demons and gave it 
to His brother Indra. 
TALE OF MATSYAVATAR  
King Parikshit asked: 'O Gurudev, Lord is omnipotent. Why did He then take 
Matsyavatar like an ordinary being bound by karma? I want to hear the tale of 

879 
 



God's Matsyavatar.' Shukdev said: 'O Parikshit, God is one. Still for the 
preservation of His devotees, He takes various incarnations. 
He also shows His plays by being present in all the creatures. But He remains 
unaffected by the merits and demerits of those living beings.' 'Parikshit, at the 
end of last Kalpa, Brahma had fallen asleep, causing a Pralaya. All the worlds 
had been inundated then. When Brahma had fallen asleep, Vedas fell out 
from his open mouth. A demon Hayagreeev abducted the Vedas by his 
illusionary powers. Omnipotent God had known the action of the demon. So 
he had to take Matsyavatar (fish-incarnation).''There was a King named 
Satyavrat during that time. He was very generous and great devotee of God. 
Sustaining himself on water only, the King was observing severe penance. The 
same King Satyavrat has come to be known as Shradhadev, the son of Surya 
(Vaivashvat) in the present Kalpa. One day, Satyavrat was taking a bath in the 
river, when a small fish came in his folded palms. The fish requested the King 
to save her. So the King put the fish in Kamandalu (coconut shell bowl). But in 
no time the fish grew too big to be accommodated in the Kamandalu. So the 
King transferred the fish into another, bigger pot, but again it grew too big to 
be accommodated in the pot. The sequence continued till the fish outgrew 
even the big lake. So the King decided to put the fish in the sea. 
The fish, which was actually an incarnation of God, requested the King not to 
put it in a sea inhabited by fierce monsters. King Satyavrat grew suspicious. So 
with folded hands, the King requested the fish to appear in its real form. 
Instantaneously, Lord Narayana appeared and told the King: 'Exactly on the 
seventh day from now, Pralaya will inundate all the three lokas. But I will send 
a boat for you. You will board the boat and tether it to my horns with Vasuki, 
the Naga.' Having received the information of deluge, the King began to wait 
for its arrival while reflecting on God's virtues. On the seventh day, dense 
clouds gathered in the sky and began to rain torrentially. Soon whole of the 
earth was inundated. The King Satyavrat found the boat sent by Lord. 
Boarding the boat, Satyavrat began to pray to God. At his prayers, Lord 
preached him the knowledge of metaphysical. Thereafter, the God killed the 

880 
 



demon Hayagreev and recovered the Vedas. When Brahma awoke from his 
sleep, Lord handed the Vedas to him.'  
 
 
CHAPTER NINE  
DESCRIPTION OF THE DYNASTY OF VAIVASVAT MANU  
King Parikshit requested Shukdev to describe about the dynasty of his 
contemporary Manu, Shradhadev. 
Shukdev said: 'Parikshit, I describe about the dynasty of Manu in short 
because if I go in detail, it will not be completed in hundreds of years.' Manu 
Shradhadev was the son of Surya and Sandhya. Name of Manu's wife was 
Shradha. They did not have any child initially, so they organised a Putrayeshti 
Yagya under the auspices of their family teacher Vashishtha. But right amidst 
the proceedings, the queen Shradha prayed the Brahmins to bless her for a 
female child. The Brahmins made offerings as per her wish. Consequently a 
girl, instead of a boy, was born to them. She was named Ila. But the King 
requested Vashishtha to transform her into a boy. Vashishtha did the same, 
and the boy thus obtained was named as Sudyumn. 
TALE OF SUDYUMN  
One day Sudyumn had gone on a hunting excursion. Riding the horse with his 
ministers, Sudyumn reached a forest at the foothills of Meru Mountain. The 
forest was the nuptial abode of Lord Shiva and Mata Parvati. As soon as 
Sudyumn and his companions entered the forests, they all, even horses, got 
converted into females. Relating its reason Sukhdev said: ' 
Once, Mata Parvati was sitting naked in the lap of Lord Shiva when suddenly 
some great sages arrived there to have a sight of Lord. Mata Parvati sank with 
shyness and ran to don some cloth. When the sages saw that Gauri and Lord 
Shiva were enjoying intimacy, they moved at once to the hermitage of Nar-
Narayana. Right at that moment, in order to please Mata Parvati, Lord Shiv 

881 
 



said: 'Except me, any man who enters here, shall become a women.' It was 
because of these words of Lord Lord Shiva, that Sudyumn and his companions 
were transformed into females. 
While Sudyumn was roaming as woman, Budh, the son of Chandra, fell in love 
with her and they agreed to get married. From their marriage, a son, 
Pururawa was born, who founded the town named Pratishthanpur. 
Sudyumn, in female form, prayed Lord Shiva to free him from woman 
incarnation. Lord Shiva blessed Sudyumn that he would be a man for a month 
and a woman for another. Thus this cycle would continue life long. Thereafter 
Sudyumn returned to the kingdom and began to rule it religiously. He got 
three sons in due course- Utkal, Gaya and Vimal. In the twilight of his life, 
Sudyumn gave his kingdom to Pururava and he took exile. 
TALE OF PARISHADHRU  
After the exile of Sudyumn, Manu took to penance with a desire to have son. 
Pleased by his penance Sri Hari blessed him to have ten sons. Parishadhru was 
the eldest of them. He was appointed in the service of the cows. One night in 
darkness, a tiger broke into the cowshed causing a panic among the cows. 
Hearing the panicky noise of the cows, Prishadhru ran to the cowshed. There 
he saw that the tiger had caught a cow, and she was bellowing in pain and 
fear. 
Prishadhru at once ran to help and with a powerful blow of the sword he 
beheaded the tiger. It was pitch dark in the cattleshed, so Prishadhru could 
not see whom he had killed. In the morning he realized that he had killed the 
cow and not the tiger. He felt extremely sorry. Their family teacher cursed him 
to lead a life of a shudra. Prishadhru, thereafter passed his life as a celibate 
and mingled with the Supreme Soul at last. 
TALE OF SHARYATI  
Sharyati was the second son of Vaivasvat Manu. He was a great scholar of 
Vedas. He had an extremely beautiful daughter named Sukanya. One day, king 
Sharyati was in the forests with his family. Thus roaming, they reached the 

882 
 



hermitage of the sage Chyavan. Chyavan was immersed in deep meditation. 
His whole body was covered with termite's nests; only eyes were shining like 
fireflies. Out of curiosity, the princess Sukanya pricked those shining eyes of 
the sage with thorns. All the king's army fell in crises by this incidence. When 
the king learned about the princess' crime, he begged pardon of the sage 
Chyavan and gave the princess in his service and himself returned to his 
palace. 
In the forest Sukanya served Chyavan with dedication. Chyavan received 
youth and vigor by the grace of Ashwini Kumar. Pleased by Shukanya's 
dedication, sage Chyavan provided her with all queenly luxuries. After many 
days, king Sharyati again visited the forests. There he saw Sukanya talking to a 
beautiful young prince. At first Sharyati scolded at Sukanya for violating the 
norms of a chast woman. But Sukanya told him about the transformation of 
the sage Chyavan by the grace of Ashwini Kumar. Learning the reality the king 
felt overjoyed to see his son-in-law Chyavan in youthful state. 
TALE OF AMBRISH 
Shukdev says, " Parikshit, Sharyati was the king Nabhag. His son was Nabhag. 
He was a great devotee of his parents. As a result of his service for his parents, 
Nabhag was very much comfortable. He had a son Ambarish who was a great 
devotee of Vishnu. Even the great wealth on earth had no value for 
Ambarish.The king Ambarish served the God with his own hands and 
remained immersed in His love.  
Once, Ambarish followed Nirjala Ekadashi Vrat (waterless fast observed on the 
eleventh day of each phase of lunar month) for a year. During one such fast, 
on the twelfth day, king Ambarish was about to break his fast, when sage 
Durvasa arrived there along with his ten thousands disciples. Welcoming him, 
the king requested Durvasa to accept food. But the sage turned down the 
request saying that it was prayer time for him, so he would first go to take 
bath, then worship and take alms (food) ultimately. But the sage Durvasa did 
not return for long. Thus by the dictate of Brahmins, king Ambarish broke his 
fast with basil leaves and water. 

883 
 



Just then sage Durvasa returned and saw Ambarish breaking his fast. So taking 
it as an insult, the infuriated Durvasa invoked Kritya in order to kill the king. 
King Ambarish stood unmoved, and begged pardon with folded hands. Lord 
Narayana saw His devotee in trouble and inspired His Sudarshan Chakra 
(wheel) to save the king. 
Sudarshan Chakra first incinerated Kritya, then aimed at sage Durvasa. When 
Durvasa saw Sudarshan aimed at him, he ran for his life. First he reached 
Brahma. But Brahma told him that he was not able to protect the person who 
had done harm to a devotee of God. Then Durvasa reached to Rudra. Lord 
Shiva also said, " Durvasa, by the wish of Lord, Rudras are engaged in the 
service of the universe. This Chakra is unstoppable by me. So you go to His 
refuge, only He can save you." From Lord Shiva's abode Durvasa reached 
Vaikunthdham, the supreme abode of Lord Vishnu. 
He was feeling intense heat of the wheel. So, shivering with fear, he felt at the 
Lord's feet and said, "O endless, you are the only venerable of all the saints. O 
Lord, I have committed a great crime against your devotee. O Lord please save 
me". Seeing sage Durvasa in his refuge, Lord Vishnu said, " Durvasa. I am 
bound to my devotee. I am not independent. As the devotees abdicate their 
everything to receive me. Similarly I am also devoted to my devotee. So I too 
can't protect you. Go to the person who you wanted to hurt, and pray him. 
Only he can save you from the Chakra. 
Thus, by the dictate of God, aggrieved Durvasa returned to the king Ambarish 
and fell at his feet. 
Ashamed of the sage act, king Ambarish prayed God, "O Lord if I had done any 
pious deed, may it be enough to calm you and may the heat that torments this 
BrahmaRishi quenched." Thus by the prayers of king Ambarish, Sudarshan was 
quietened and returned to its position on Lords finger and sage Durvasa 
recovered from his sufferings. He blessed the king and left. 
DESCRIPTION OF IKSHVAKU DYNASTY  

884 
 



Shukdev says, "Once Shradhadev Manu sneezed violently. From his nostrils, a 
son was born. He was named Ikshvaku. Ikshvaku had one hundred sons. 
Vikukshi, Nimi and Dandak were the eldest three of them.1.)Vikukshi :-  
Once, Ikshvaku sent his eldest son Vikukshi to collect tubers for the offerings 
to be made to their ancestors. Vikukshi collected sacred Shash tubers. But, he 
himself was feeling tired and hungry, so he ate one of them. He gave the 
remaining tubers to his father. King Ikshvaku gave those tubers to Guru 
Vashishtha for offering to the ancestors. Vashishtha informed the king that 
the tubers were defiled and not fit for offerings. Thus told by Vashishtha, 
Ikshvaku learned the deed of his son and expelled him out of his kingdom in 
anger. Vikukshi passed his life in exile and returned home only after the death 
of his father. He became famous as Shashad. 
2.)Puranajay :- Puranajay was the son of Vikukshi. He is also famous as 
'Indravah' and 'Kakutsth.' A fierce battle had taken place between the Gods 
and the demons.In the battle, the Gods had sought the help from Puranajay. 
But Puranajay stipulated that he would fight only when Indra agreed to 
become his vehicle. From God's inspiration, Indra took the guise of a big and 
heavy ox and bore Puranajay on his back. When Puranajay rode on the ox and 
trained his divine bow and arrows, all the Gods prayed to him. Since, 
Puranajay had taken seat near ox's hump, he came to be known as Kakutsth. 
Puranajay fought a fierce battle with the demons. Thus in no time Puranajay 
defeated the demons and captured their towns, wealth, luxuries and every 
other thing and gave them to Indra. Since, Indra had acted as his vehicle, 
hence Puranajay is also known as Indravah. 
3.)Yuvnashva :- In the lineage of Puranajay, had occurred a king named 
Yuvnashva. He had no son, so in desperation he gave up his kingdom and, 
accompanied by his queens, came to stay in the forest. There he organized a 
grand Yagya, Indrayag with a desire of a son and in the auspices of the great 
sages. The Yagya lasted day and night. But during the Yagya, Yuvnashva felt 
extremely thirsty and without giving a thought he drank some of the water 
from urn that had been sanctified with mantras. Since, the water was meant 

885 
 



to produce a child, Yuvnashva begot a child with auspicious signs. Immediately 
after birth the child began to cry for milk. So to quiten him Indra put his index 
finger in the child's mouth. Since then, the child got the name Mandhata. 
Mandhata became a great emperor. He was also known as Trasdasyu because 
big robbers like Ravana had an inherent fear of him. Mandhata had deep self-
learnings, still he organized many grand Yagyas. Mandhata had three sons- 
Purykuts, Ambarish (second) and Muchkund. He had fifty daughters also. All of 
them were married to the sage Saurabhi. 
4.)Trishanku :- In this lineage of Mandhata there occurred a king named 
Satyvrat. He was renamed as Trishanku. Though by the curse of his father and 
the teacher, he had become a Chandal (an untouchable person) yet by the 
power of his penance, sage Vishvmitra helped him reach heaven with the 
body. But the jealous Gods pushed down poor Satyvrat from the heaven. 
He was falling headlong while MahaRishi Vishumitra supported and fixed him 
in mid sky, hence he got the name Trishanku. 
5.)Harishchandra :- He was the son of Trishanku. For him, two great sages 
Vishvmitra and Vashishtha had cursed each other and acquired bird forms and 
kept on fighting for many years. 
Harishchandra had no son. With a desire to have a son, Harishchandra 
worshiped Varunadev. By the grace of Varuna, he got a son named Rohit. 
Caught in the love for his son, Harishchandra forgot to organize Yagya to pay 
his thanks to Varuna. Rohit too had fled to the forest to save his life when he 
learned that his father wished to sacrifice him. He stayed there for long. Back 
there in the kingdom Harishchandra acquired a deadly disease of Dropsy as a 
result of Varuna's anger. 
Having learnt about his father's illness, Rohit tried five times to return to the 
kingdom, but every time Indra forebode him. Thus he stayed in the forest for 
six years. But in the seventh year he bought the middle son of Ajigart and took 
him to the kingdom to be used as a votive animal. 

886 
 



There he handed the boy over to his father. Thereafter, king Harishchandra 
organized a grand Yagya and pleased Varuna. Pleased by their unshakable 
faith in truthfulness sage Vishvamitra blessed Harishchandra and his wife and 
preached them about metaphysical knowledge. 
6.)Sagar :- In the lineage of Rohit later on, had occurred a King Bahuk. 
Unfortunately, he met an untimely death. One of his widowed wife got ready 
to be immolated with her husband's pyre. 
She was pregnant then, so the sage Aurv prevented her from getting Sati. 
When her fellow queens learnt about her pregnancy, they fed her with 
poisoned food. But the poison proved ineffective on the unborn baby. The 
baby was born in due course with poison, so he came to be known as Sagar. 
Sagar had a great reputation as the King. He had sixty thousand sons. He had 
also resolved to organize one hundred Ashvmamegh Yagyas. His ninety-nine 
Yagyas completed without hassles, but during the hundredth Yagya, Indra 
stole the horse and tethered it in the hermitage of the sage Kapila. Sagar's 
sixty thousand sons set out in search of the horse, but could not find it 
anywhere on earth. 
At last, they reached the hermitage of the sage Kapila. Before that, with their 
enormous power, they had dug out huge pits, which filled with water and 
formed the sea. The sea derived its Hindi Synonym Sagar from Sagar. When 
those sixty thousand princes saw that the Yagya horse was Tethered in 
Kapila's hermitage, they began to abuse the sage. Disturbed by the noise, the 
sage Kapila opened his eyes, and instantaneously all the sixty thousand 
princes got incinerated. It was Anshumana, the grandson of Sagar, who 
pacified sage Kapila with his politeness and brought back the horse. He also 
discovered the ashes of his ancestors. Sage Kapila told Anshumana that the 
salvation of his ancestors would be possible only if touched by Gangaji, (the 
sacred Ganges). 
Since then, all the kings in Sagar's lineage observed severe penance to bring 
the Ganges on earth for the salvation of their ancestors. 

887 
 



7.)Bhagirath :- First of all, king Anshumana observed hard penance. But even 
after many years of penance he could not succeed in his efforts. His son Dileep 
also observed sever penance, but his efforts too, could not succeed. Bhagirath 
was the son of Dileep. After Dileep, Bhagirath started severe penance. After 
many years of penance, Bhagirath succeeded in pleasing the Ganges. She 
appeared before him and asked him to seek a boon. Bhagiratha requested the 
Ganges to arrive on earth. The Ganges accepted his wish, but put a question 
as to who would support her when she fell on earth from the heaven. 
Bhagiratha then began his penance again to please Lord Shiva so that He could 
support the Ganges on earth. Lord Shiva accepted Bhagirath's prays and 
supported the Ganges on his head. Thereafter He moved on the path shown 
by Bhagirath with sacred Ganges following. Thus, the sacred Ganges reached 
at the place where ashes of Bhagirath's ancestors were lying. The holy waters 
of the Ganges washed the ashes to the confluence at Ganga Sagar. By the 
mere touch of Ganges' holy water, Bhagirath ancestors received 
salvation.After Bhagirath many great kings like Michsah, Khatvang, 
Dhirghbahu, Raghu etc. occurred in the Ikshvaku dynasty. Raghu's son was Aja 
and his son was Dashrath. It was in the home of King Dashrath, and by the 
prayer of the Gods, that Lord Sri Hari took birth as four sons of Dashrath. 
8.)Description of Lord Rama's Plays :-  Shukdev says, " Parikshit, to keep the 
words of his father, Lord Rama abdicated the entire kingdom and took exile in 
the forest. Staying in the forest Lord Rama protected many sages, and helped 
them complete their religious rituals successfully. He slayed many formidable 
demons there. But, for cutting the nose and ears of Shupanakha, the sister of 
demon king Ravana, He had to bear the separation of his wife sita. 
Rama had won Sita as his wife in a swayamvar in Janakapur. In his teenage, 
sage Vishmatria had taken Rama and Lakshmana with him to his hermitage to 
guard his religious proceedings against the demons. Rama and Lakshmana had 
killed many demons then. It was during this period that the swayamvar was 
organized in Janakapur. Lakshmi, the better half of Lord Vishnu, had herself 
appeared as Sita in Janakapur. Sage Vishvamitra himself taken Rama and 

888 
 



Lakshmana to the swayamvar. Many more brave and strong kings and princes 
had gathered there. But no one could train the Bow of Lord Shiva as per the 
condition of the swyamvar. It was only Rama, who not only lifted the bow but 
trained it also. In the process of training, the bow broke with a loud noise. 
Thus Lord Rama won Sita as His wife. 
But during the exile the demon king Ravana deceitfully abducted Sita to 
avenge the insult of his sister Shurpanakha. Thereafter, the circumstances 
favored Lord Rama and He soon found out the whereabouts of Sita. With a 
huge army of monkeys and bears, Lord Rama reached the seashore there He 
prayed to the sea to make way for Him. But the sea did not pay heed to his 
prayers, so angrily He got ready to evaporate the sea. Thus frightened, the sea 
revealed to Him the way to make a bridge over it. Lord Rama then built a 
bridge over the sea and landed in Lanka. A fierce battle followed in which Lord 
Rama and Lakshman together slayed the demon king Ravana, his brother 
Kumbhkarn and Megnad, the son of Ravana. 
Thus, they got Sita free from Ravana's captivity. Crowning Vibhishan, the 
brother of Ravana as the King of Lanka, they returned to Ayodha on Pushpak 
Vimana. BrahmRishis crowned Rama as the king of Ayodhya. All the three 
worlds became happier, healthier and wealthier. Bharata, Lakshmana, 
Shatrughn and Hanumanji stayed forever in the service of Lord Rama always 
following the moral dictates and put an example for the world of high morals. 
As a king, Lord Rama also organized Ashvmegh Yagya. 
CHANDRA DYNASTY  
 
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, now I narrate about Chandra dynasty. Many great 
and pious kings like Pururava had occurred in this dynasty. Chandrama was 
the son of Atri, the son of Brahma. Budh was the son of Chandrama while 
Pururava was the son of Budh. Ila was the mother of Pururava. 
He was very virtuous. Attracted by his virtues, the apsara Urvashi had 
approached Pururava with a sensual desire. Pururava welcomed Urvashi, and 

889 
 



together they begot six sons- Ayu, Shrutayu, Satyayu, Ray, Vijay and Jay. In the 
lineage of Vijay the son of Pururava, there had occurred a king Gadhi. Gadhi 
had a daughter Satyvati. Satyvati was married to the sage Richik. Richik and 
Satyvati begot Jamadagni who married Renuka, the daughter of sage Renu. 
Jamadagni and Renuka begot Parashurama. In the same lineage, later on, 
occurred great kings like Rantidev, Shibi, Yadu, Kuru, Puru, Dushyant and 
Bharata. In this lineage of Kuru, king Shantanu had married Ganga, who gave 
birth to Bhisma. Satyavati, the daughter of Nishad was the second wife of 
Shantanu. She begot Chitrangad and Vichitravirya. Chitrangad had died in an 
encounter with a demiGod of his own name, while Vichitravirya was married 
to Ambika and Ambalika the princesses of Kashi. But, having too much caenal 
indulgence with his wives, Vichitravirya soon developed tuberculosis and died 
without producing a child. 
Since, Bhisma had vowed to abide by celibacy till death, so Vyasa was 
summoned to produce children from Ambika and Ambalika. From Vyasa the 
two queens and a maid gave birth to Dhritrashtra, Pandu and Vidura 
respectively. Dhritrashtra had one hundred sons. The Kuaravas, while Pandu's 
wife Kunti begot Karan, Ydhishthir, Bhima and Arjuna. Pandu's second wife 
Madri begot Nakul and Sahdev. Arjuna had married Subhadra, the sister of 
Lord Krishna also. 
Subhadra had begot Abhimanyu who was married to Uttra, the daughter of 
Viratraja, and you were born to Uttara, O Parikshit. 
In Yaduvansh, lineage of Yadu a king Shursen had occurred. He had a son 
Vasudev. Vasudev had eight wives. Devaki was the prominent among them. 
Nine children were born to them. 
Kansa, the brother of Devki, killed six of them. Seventh was Balarama, eighth 
Krishna, and at ninth place was her daughter Subhadra. 
 
Shukdev says, "O Parikshit, Lord Himself had appeared as the son of Vasudev 
and Devaki. 

890 
 



Whenever the religion and religious virtues fall in the world and sins rises, the 
omnipotent, Lord Sri Hari takes incarnation to destroy the evils, and protect 
the pious ones and establish the religion again. 
When the evil demons took the guise of the kings and began to route the 
earth, Lord Vishnu then took the incarnation as Lord Krishna. Along with Him, 
Sheshnaga, His bed, also took incarnation as Balarama, in Yadu Vansh. 
Together they presented such divine plays that even the Gods could not guess 
them. 
At the same time, to benefit the devotees, who would be born in Kali Yuga, 
Lord Krishna expounded His pious life into uncountable incidents. Merely by 
reciting and hearing the tales of Lord's life, all the sorrows, melancholis and 
ignorance of the devotees are removed. Through the battle of Mahabharataa 
between Kauravas and Pandavas, Lord Krishna relieved the earth of most of 
her burdens. He Himself slayed many demons, while got many slain by 
Balarana. Ultimately, preaching Uddhava about metaphysical knowledge, Lord 
Krishna departed to His divine abode. 
 
CHAPTER TEN  
Hearing the tales of Royal dynasties from Shukdev, king Parikshit requested 
"Guruvar, you have just narrated the suprising tale of Suryvansh and 
Chandravanash (dynasties). Now I wish to hear the tales of Lord Krishna's life 
in detail. It was because of God's grace that my ancestors could successfully 
win the Mahabharataa. I to had experienced Lords grace while I was an 
unborne child and Ashvathama had triggered Brahmastra to destroy me. It 
was the Lord himself who saved me from the heat of Brahmastra with his 
wheel. O sage, therefore, kindly narrate the tale of Krishna's life who is the 
soul of every living being. I do not feel thirsty or hungry while hearing the 
pious tale of God's life from you." Pleased by the pure devotion of Parikshit for 
God,  

891 
 



Shukdev says, "When the atrocities of evil demons increased on earth beyond 
a certain limit, the perplexed earth reached to Brahma in the guise of a cow, 
and vented her sorrows. Brahma took her and Lord Shiva to Lord Vishnu and 
prayed Him through Purushasukta. Lord heard their prayers and said, "I know 
about the sufferings of poor earth. Very soon, I'll take incarnation in 
Yaduvansh to elevate her burden. All the Gods, should take birth in Yadukul to 
assist me during my human incarnation. And to serve my beloved Radha, all 
the apsaras should appear as the womenfolk of Yudu community." Brahma 
dictated the Gods and said that even Yoga Maya (personification of illusions) 
of Lord Vishnu would take a partial incarnation to assist the Lord in His plays. 
Thus consoling the earth Brahma returned to his abode. 
MARRIGE OF VASUDEV AND DEVAKI  
Shursen's son Vasudev was married to Devaki, the daughter of Devak. After 
the marriage ceremony, Ugrasen's son and Devki's cousin Kansa was driving 
the chariot of newly wedded couple. On the way a celestial voice proclaimed " 
O Fool Kansa, the eighth son of your beloved sister, whose chariot you are 
driving so affectionately, shall be the cause of your death.." Hearing the voice 
Kansa drew out his sword to kill Devaki. But Vasudev prayed to him politely, 
"Prince Kansa, you are the descendent of Bhoj dynasty, you are a brave man. 
It does not fit you bravery that you are yourself ready to kill your sister. She is 
a woman and has just got married. She has not done any harm to you, she 
deserves pity. If you fear her children, I promise that I will give all her children 
to you." Thus assured by truth abiding Vasudev's words, Kansa dropped the 
idea of killing Devaki. 
As per his promise, Vasudev gave his first newborn child to Kansa. Pleased by 
Vasudev's abidance to truth, Kansa said, "You eighth son will be my enemy, so 
I will kill only your eighth son. Take the child back." At the same time, singing 
in Lord's praise, DevaRishi Narada appeared there and said, "O Kansa in view 
of rising atrocities of demons, Lord Narayana himself will take birth in 
Yaduvansh. Besides Him, all the cowboys and all others who belonged to 
Yadav clan are none other than the Gods in Human guise. The Gods are 

892 
 



making massive preparations to exterminate evil kings and as a lotus has only 
eight petals and no one can mark out its eighth petal, similarly, Devaki will 
have eight children and no one would be able to find out who is the eighth." 
Saying this, DevaRishi Narada disappeared, Kansa got firm belief that all the 
Yaduvanshis were Gods and that Lord Vishnu Himself would take birth as 
Vasudev and Devaki's son to kill him. He, therefore, put Vasudev and Devaki in 
the prison. Since then Kansa killed the children one by one soon after their 
birth,Shesh Narayana Himself appeared as the seventh son. While he was still 
unborn, Lord Vishnu through His Yogmaya (personified illusion), transfered 
the embryo in Rohini's womb. Lord dictated Yogama that she herself should 
take birth from Yashoda, the wife of Nand, in Gokul. He also blessed her that 
in future, people would worship her as Durga, Chandika, Bhadrakali, Narayani, 
Vaishnavi etc. When the seventh fetus was transferred, Kansa got worried 
how was it destroyed. His fears and melancholy increased since then. A fear 
gripped him that his death was very near now. 
ARRIVAL OF GOD IN UNBORN BABY  
Kansa had known that during the battle between the Gods and demons he 
was the demon Kalnemi, and he was killed by Lord Vishnu. So fearing Lord 
Vishnu rallying with Yaduvanshis, Kansa cultivated high degree of hostility 
towards them. He captured even his father Ugrasen and put him in the prison. 
Now the reign of the kingdom was entirely in his hands. Kansa was himself 
very strong and also had the assistance of his father-in-law, Jarasandh. 
Formidable demon like Pralamb, Baka, Chanur, Trinavart, Aghasur, Mushtik, 
Arisht, Dvivid, Pootana, Kashi and Dhenuk were his courtiers. As a result of 
Kansa atrocities en mass exodus of Yaduvanshis from Mathura followed. 
These Yaduvanshis left Mathura and settled in regions like Kuru, Panchal etc. 
Still some of them accepted to serve Kansa, but only superficially. 
When all pervasive Lord saw that Yaduvanshis were being tortured without 
reason, He transferred his glory in Vasudev. Through Vasudev, Devaki received 
that brilliant part of the lord. On the other hand, Kansa also came to know 
about Devaki's eighth issue. Since, then his hostility surged unprecidently and 

893 
 



he began to wait for the birth of Devaki's eight son very anxiously. All it means 
to say that Kansa mind reflected on God every moment day in and day out. 
BIRTH OF LORD KRISHNA  
The long awaited day also arrived at last. It was the eighth day in the waning 
(darker) phase of the lunar month of Bhadrapada (corresponding to 
August/September). Rohini, the brightest star was rising while dense clouds 
had gathered in the sky. 
Before actual arrival, Lord manifested Himself before Vasudev and Devaki. 
They felt as if a full moon had risen in the east. Vasudev saw that an 
extraordinarily marvellous baby boy was standing before them. His eyes were 
as soft as lotus; He had four arms and held a conch, mace, wheel and lotus. He 
bore Kaustubh Mani in the neck and wore yellow clothes. Valuable ornaments 
adorned all parts of his body. Thus, seeing God himself arrived as his son, 
Vasudev was overwhelmed. Devaki too was overjoyed but feared Kansa first. 
Then she joyfully prayed to God. God said then, "During Swayambhu 
Manvantar, both of you had worshipped me with a desire of son. Vasudev was 
a Prajapati Sutapa while you were his wife Prishni. You had worshipped me 
with pure hearts. Pleased by your penance I had asked you to seek a boon, so 
you had sought a son like me in virtues. I had arrived then as your son 
Prishnigarbh. In the next birth you were Kashyapa and Aditi and I was 
Upendra. Now, in the third birth also. I have arrived as your son."Saying this, 
the Lord transformed Himself into an ordinary baby. From the inspiration of 
God, Vasudev wished to move the baby out of the prison. Instantaneously, all 
the locks of the jail opened automatically and the guards fell asleep. Carrying 
the baby in a winnower, Vasudev set out for Gokul across the river Yamuna. 
It was raining heavily, so Sheshnaga followed them shading the baby with his 
hoods. Vasudev entered the river Yamuna. Yamuna too felt overjoyed that her 
most beloved Lord has come to her. 
Hence, she began to rise in order to touch His feet. Dangling his feet behind 
Vasudev, God let Yamuna touch them. Touching the feet, the swelling river 

894 
 



receded at once and gave Vasudev a safe passage. Crossing the river, Vasudev 
reached Gokul. There, he entered the home of Nand and kept the baby beside 
Yashoda and took her new born baby girl and brought her to the prison. 
As soon as Vasudev kept the baby girl in Devaki's lap, the gates locked up 
again and the guards awakened. 
The baby who was actually Yogamaya (personification of illusion) began to cry. 
The guards at once ran to inform Kansa about the birth. Kansa came running 
and snatched the baby from Devaki and proceeded to throw her on the stone. 
But before he could throw her, the baby escaped from his hands and assumed 
Ashtbhuji (eight-armed) Durga appearance in the sky and reprimanded him: 
"O fool, why are you trying to kill me, when you can't even harm me, the one 
who will kill you, has already appearred. Now stop killing the innocent 
children." Kansa stood stunned by the talks and appearance of the Goddess. 
Goddess Bhagavati disappeared and became omnipresent. She is now 
venerable with different names in different locations. 
After the disappearance of Goddess (Yogamaya) Kansa felt remorse. He at 
once fell at the feet of his sister Devaki and brother-in-law Vasudev and began 
to beg their pardon. Thereafter, Kansa released both of them. In the morning, 
Kansa held a discussion with his ministers. The ministers, who were 
formidable demons themselves, assured Kansa that they would kill all the 
babies born within ten days and destroy the Brahmins, cows, Gods, ascetics 
and all those who could pose potential danger to him. 
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, the demons were Rajoguni (having royal virtues) 
and Tamoguni (Virtues of darkness) and hence were unable to differentiate 
good from evils. Their extermination was imminent. That was why they 
cultivated hostility towards saints and saintly people. O King, those, who 
disregard saintly people, loose their life, wealth, reputation, religion and 
everything. 
FESTIVITIES IN GOKUL OVER LORD'S BIRTH  

895 
 



Devaki's seventh baby was transferred before birth into the womb of Rohini. 
The baby was born as Baldevji. At his birth, Brahmins blessed Nand. But 
laughingly Nand said: "O holy Brahmins, this baby is not mine. It is born to my 
friend's wife." Brahmins said then: "Okay Baba, we will return only when your 
wife bears a child. The Brahmins thereafter organised grand worships. By their 
blessings Yashoda conceived. 
It was Wednesday, the eighth day in the darker phase of the lunar month 
Bhadrapada (August/September), when Yashoda said to her sister-in-law 
Sunanda: "Sister, kindly wake me up, when the baby takes birth," Sunanda 
laughed at that. It was in fact the influence of Yogamaya. When Yogamaya 
took birth, all the people around her were fast asleep and continued to sleep 
until Vasudev came there and replaced the baby girl with baby boy. Soon after 
Vasudev left, Yashoda awakened from slumber and saw an extremely 
beautiful baby boy beside her. Nand was meditating then in the cowshed. He 
was informed at once. His heart too filled with supernatural joy. He took his 
bath, and droned new clothes. Then he summoned the Brahmins and got 
necessary rituals performed. Served the Gods and his ancestors and donated 
cows, clothes, ornaments and cereals to the Brahmins. 
As Nand was the chief of Vraj region, so all the people decided to celebrate 
baby's birth. All the houses, streets and lanes were cleaned and sprinkled with 
scented waters. All the gateways were embellished with flags, pylons and 
festoons. All the villagers began to gather in and around Nand's home. 
Ladiesfolk also felt overjoyed by the news of the birth of Yashoda's son. Even 
the cows, oxen and calves also were adorned beautifully. Brahma, Narada, 
Sanakadi etc. were all having the sight of Lord from heaven. Even Lakshmi 
appeared in Gokul, illuminating all the azimuths. Gopis (ladiesfolk) decorated 
their palms with henna, anointed themselves with ubatan (a paste composed 
of gram flour and many herbs, supposed to enhance beauty) and took bath. 
Then they adorned themselves from tip to toes and set out for Nand's homes 
with various gifts. 

896 
 



At Nand's home they sprinkled the baby with water containing turmeric and 
oil and sang auspicious songs loudly. 
Thus, when Lord appeared in Braj, grand celebration was organised in His 
welcome, auspicious music was played. The menfolk celebrated the joy 
spraying one another with milk, curd, butter etc. Nand presented the people 
generously with clothes, ornaments and cows. Prisoners, ascetics and beggars 
were given alms. At the request of Nand, Rohini herself welcomed the 
womenfolk. 
Since the arrival of lord, prosperity too came to stay in Vraj. 
SALVATION OF POOTANA  
Shukdev says: 'Parikshit, after many days, entrusting other Gopals with the 
onus of guarding Gokul, Nand went to Mathura to pay annual taxes in Kansa's 
court. Vasudev too learned about his arrival and went to see him. Nand felt 
overjoyed to see Vasudev and embraced him affectionately. Vasudev asked 
Nand: "Your age is declining now. It is very fortunate now that you have also 
got a son. My Son Balarama and wife Rohini are staying with you. He would be 
regarding you as his parents." Nand said: The evil Kansa killed many of your 
children. He did not even spare your daughter, No doubt, happiness and 
sorrow are bound to ones fate." Vasudev said: "Brother, now your duties here 
are over. You should not stay here for long, because I fear some disturbances 
in Gokul in your absence. Hearing this, Nand at once set out for Gokul. In the 
way, he reflected over the words of Vasudev and prayed God: "May God, 
everything thing be well in Gokul. There in Gokul however a curious incidence 
took place. After his discussion with evil ministers, Kansa had sent a cruel 
ogress Pootana to kill all the newly born babies in his kingdom. In the guise of 
an extremely pretty woman, Pootana entered Gokul. She hypnotized the 
menfolk with her sweet smile and flirting glances. She searched new-born 
babies here and there and entered Nand's home eventually. Baby Lord Krishna 
was sleeping in the cradle. He had known about her arrival; but posed as if He 
were asleep. Pootana is a form of non-knowledge with an alluring outward 
appearance. Lord Krishna was only six days old then. 

897 
 



Pootana's breasts were filled with poison. Such as someone lifts a sleeping 
snake mistaking it for a rope. Similarly Pootana lifted the baby who proved her 
death. Pootana took the baby to secluded place and began to breast feed him. 
Lord prayed to Lord Shiva who came to stay in His throat and drank all the 
poison from the milk. Thereafter the Lord began to suck Pootana's life. 
Perplexed Pootana began to cry loudly and writhe nervously. As her death 
approached she regained her real, ogress appearance. All the men and 
women were frightened when they saw the huge, formidable body of 
Pootana. But when they saw Krishna playing nearby, their fear gone and with 
joy they lifted the baby and soothed him. 
Meanwhile, Nand and his fellow Gopas too arrived from Mathura. Pootana's 
body testified the truth of Vasudev's words. Gopas cut Pootana's body into 
many pieces and burnt them outside Gokul. When her body was burning, a 
sweet smell of Agar (a kind of scented wood used in incense making) spread 
all around. Because Lord himself had fed on her milk, So all her sins were 
destroyed. Lord regarded her as his mother and hence saved her. 
KILLING OF SHAKAT  
When Lord Krishna was twenty-seven days old, a festival was organised in 
Gokul. Mata Yashoda bathed the baby while the Brahmins recited hymns. 
Yashoda saw that baby was feeling sleepy, so putting him in a cradle, she left 
it under a cart. The cart was loaded with pitchers of milk, curd and butter. 
After sometime, Lord Krishna awoke and began to cry for a feed. But amidst 
festivities, Yashoda could not hear his cries. 
Meanwhile a demon Shakatasur rode the cart wishing to press the cart and 
thereby kill the Lord. 
But before he could act, the Lord touched the cart with His feet and lo and 
behold! The cart turned over and all the utensils kept on it came crashing 
down. Even the demon was crushed to death under the cart. Other boys, who 
were playing nearby, informed the Gopis (ladiesfolk) that the little Kanhaiya 
had turned over the loaded cart, but they did not believe the kids. Yashoda 

898 
 



ran in horror and lifted the baby in her lap. The Brahmins recited pacifying 
hymns then. Thereafter the baby was bathed again with sanctified water. A 
feast of Brahmins followed then. Ultimately they were seen off with many 
gifts. 
SALVATION OF TRINAVART  
Once Mata Yashoda was playing with the baby Lord in her home. All of a 
sudden she felt as if the baby was getting disproportionately heavy. Soon, she 
felt herself unable to bear the child anymore. So she left the child on the 
ground and began to pray Purushaottama Lord Rama. Soon afterwards she 
forgot about the event, but all was not over yet. Trinavart, a demon minister 
of Kansa, had arrived in Gokul as a fierce cyclone. He covered entire Gokul 
with dust and blinded the people temporarily. For a moment people could not 
see anything and during that moment Trinavart blew the baby in air with him. 
When the dust settled, Yashoda did not find the baby Krishna where she had 
left him. She felt extremely sorry and fell on ground in depression. Other 
womenfolk also gathered round her. They too began to cry not seeing baby 
Krishna there. 
In the form of cyclone, the demon Trinavart had blown baby Krishna with him; 
but he too could not bear his heavy burden. So he began to lose his velocity. 
Lord Krishna caught him by neck. 
The demon died in a few moments and his dead body fell in Vraj. And Yashoda 
got a new lease of life when she saw baby Krishna safe and sound. Nand and 
other Gopas too were overjoyed. 
NAMING OF LORD KRISHNA  
Once, the supreme ascetic Gargacharya arrived in Gokul. He was the ancestral 
teacher of Yaduvanshis. Nand joyfully welcomed and treated the hermit. Then 
he requested him to carry out the ritual of naming and suggest suitable 
named for both of his sons. Acharya Garg said, "O Nand, everyone knows that 
I am the ancestral teacher of the Yadavs. If I carry out the naming ritual for 
these boys, people will understand that they are Devaki's sons." So Nand 

899 
 



requested Gargacharya to name his sons secretly. Gargacharya accepted his 
request and carried out the naming rituals secretly in Nand's cattle shed. 
Garg said: "This son of Rohini will cause by his virtue, great pleasures for his 
near and dear ones. So his second name will be Rama. And because of 
excessive strength, people will call him as Bala also. Since he will unite the 
people also, so one of his names would be Sankarshana." Thereafter, Garg 
said pointing to Yashodanandan. He has taken incarnation in every age. In the 
past ages, he had taken white, red and yellow complexions respectively. This 
time he has taken dark complexion, so he will be known as Krishna.  
Once he has been the son of Vasudev, so people will call him as Vasudev also. 
He will cause salvation of all of you, and great joy for the fellow Gopas and 
cows. With his help, you will overcome even the severe crises. O Nand, This 
boy will be equal to Narayana in virtues, wealth, beauty, fame and influence. 
Foster this child with care and earnestness." Thus naming the boys as per their 
virtues, Garg returned to his hermitage. 
CHILDHOOD OF LORD KRISHNA  
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, time passed in Gokul as usual. Balarama and 
Krishna too grew normally. Soon they began to walk on knees and palms. With 
their childish plays they both amused men and women folk of Gokul. Everyone 
took special care of them and looked after them to save them from any 
possible danger. Ladiesfolk were specially careful about them. 
Soon afterwards, both the kids began to walk trottingly. Now their movement 
no longer confined within the boundary of their home. Because of his special 
virtues, Krishna began to lead other kids of his age group whereas his elder 
brother Balarama was somewhat serious in nature. 
Krishna specially enjoyed teasing the girls and milkmaids of Gokul. Often he 
would eat stealing their milk, curd and butter. At other times, He did not 
hesitate even to break their pitchers. In such situations the ladiesfolk used to 
gather in Nand's home to complain against Krishna. And every time Yashoda 

900 
 



promised them to punish Krishna. But every time, when she proceeded to 
punish him, she forgot everything before his sweet, innocent smile. 
One day, Balarama complained against Krishna, "Ma, the little Kanhaiya has 
eaten mud. 
Worried about Krishna's health, Yashoda scolded at him: "Tell me, O 
mischievous Krishna, why did you eat mud". At that moment, little Krishna's 
eyes were moving with fear. He made an excuse: "No Ma, I have not eaten 
any mud. They are telling yoou a lie. If you don't believe, me see yourself." 
Saying this, Krishna opened his little mouth. Yashoda peeped into his mouth 
and what she saw there amazed her. She could not believe it. The entire 
universe was visible in his little mouth. Yashoda saw strange places, entire Vraj 
and even herself in the little mouth of Krishna. She felt dizzy. With his 
illusionary powers, Lord wiped out the memory of this incidence from the 
mind of Yashoda, and she again immersed in love with her child. 
UKHAL BANDHAN AND SALVATION OF YAMALARJUNA  
Once, wishing to feed Krishna with butter, Yashoda began to churn milk in the 
morning . Very soon, Krishna too awakened and not finding the mother on her 
bed, He set out to search her. 
Soon He found her in the courtyard where she was churning the milk. He 
began to insist for breast feeding at once. So Yashoda stopped churning and 
began to breast feed Krishna. Affection played on her face. Suddenly the milk 
kept on the fire pot began to boil. Yashoda left Krishna in order to attend the 
boiling milk. But the unstiated Krishna filled with anger and broke the pitcher 
of curd. Then he went inside and began to eat butter, when Yashoda came 
back, she understood the matter and began to search him with a stick in her 
hand. After eating butter himself, Krishna was now feeding the monkeys with 
it. Seeing the mother come in hot pursuit, Krishna jumped over the mortar 
and ran away. Yashoda chased him, but soon felt tired because of her bulky 
body. 

901 
 



Thereafter, Yashoda proceeded to tie Krishna as a punishment. She got a rope 
and tried to tie Krishna. But the rope fell short by two fingers. She joined 
many ropes together but the result was same. Every time the ropes fell short 
by two fingers. Soon, Yashoda was bathing in sweat. When Krishna saw his 
mother in depression, he himself tied in the ropes. Tethering little Krishna to a 
heavy mortar, Yashoda engaged in usual household tasks. Tethered to the 
mortar, Krishna glanced at the two Arjuna trees, which were standing on the 
gate like two sentries. He resolved to save them. 
King Parikshit asked Shukdev about the trees. Shukdev said: "Parikshit, the 
Lord of wealth Kubera had two sons Nalkubar and Manigreev. One day they 
were enjoying the sweet company of pretty women on the bank of Mandakini 
river. Just by coincidence, Devarshi Narada arrived there. Out of Shyness, the 
women folk at once covered themselves, but both the sons of Kubera stood 
boldly without feeling any shame. Indignant Narada cursed them to become 
trees and stay in that form for one hundred years. Narada showed kindness as 
well that despite being in tree forms, they would have the memory of God 
alive and would be saved by Lord Sri Krishna. Thus, to keep the words of his 
supreme devotee Narada, Lord dragged the mortar to the two Arjuna trees. 
He walked in such a way that the mortar got stuck between the trees. Krishna 
then pulled the mortar and in no time the trees were uprooted. Two divine 
men appeared from the uprooted trees and bowed at the feet of Krishna and 
prayed him with pure hearts. Then they departed to their heavenly abode. 
MIGRATION TO VRINDAVANA  
The uprooted Arjuna trees fell with thundering sound. All the people shivered 
with fear and felt as if lightning had struck somewhere. All the elders including 
Nand met together and discussed the matter. Unanimously they concluded 
that, of late disturbance had increased in Gokul and the circumstances were 
no longer conducive to raise the kids like Balarama and Krishna there. So they 
unanimously decided to leave Gokul and migrate to a verdant place named 
Vrindavana. In their opinion, Vrindavana had ample vegetation and fertility to 
support them and their cattles. 

902 
 



Thus, on an auspicious day, the entire population of Gokul set out for 
Vrindavana. They packed their households on bullock carts and drove their 
cattles in herds and started in convoy. In Vrindavana they built their houses 
and started their life once again. 
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, verdant environment of Vrindavana, Govardhan 
mountain and crystal clear waters and sandy banks of Yamuna river together 
filled the hearts of Balarama and Krishna with joy. Along with the fellow 
cowherds, they began diverse kinds of plays there. 
SALVATION OF VATSASUR  
One day, Balarama and Krishna were grazing their cattles on the bank of 
Yamuna River. A demon, meanwhile, took the guise of a calf and mixed with 
the herd. Obviously, he had malicious intentions. Lord Krishna had already 
seen the demon taking calf's guise and mixing up with the herd. He signaled 
Balarama and they together reached near the calf. The calf appeared 
particularly healthy, so Krishna and Balarama mockingly saw it with admiring 
eyes. Suddenly they held the calf with its hind legs and tail twirling it in air 
they threw it in the sky. When the demon died, they threw him on a Kath 
(wood-apple) tree. 
SALVATION OF BAKASUR  
One day, all the cowherds took their cattles to a large pond to let them drink 
water. There they say a huge creature sitting like a hillock on the bank. They 
were frightened by its appearance. 
The creature was in fact a demon named Bakasur who had arrived there in the 
guise of a storke. 
He was himself very strong and had a long pointed bill. As soon as the 
cowherds drew near him, The storke hastily picked up Krishna and swallowed 
him. Other cowherds including Balarama were stupefied. They could not 
believe their eyes. But inside the beak, Lord Krishna made himself extremely 
hot and caused severe burning in demon's throat. So the demon could not 
swallow Krishna and regurgitated him, and began to hit him with his strong 

903 
 



beak. But Lord held his beak with both his hands and tore the demon's mouth 
apart. And as son as the demon died, a ripple of joy surged among the 
cowherds. SALVATION OF AGHASUR One day, Krishna planned a picnic near 
Nandanvan. So rising early in the morning, He awakened his fellow cowherds 
sounding a horn. Together, all the cowherds, and their cattles went to the 
forest. There, on the bank of Yamuna river they began to play joyfully. 
Nandanvana was in fact an abode of the demon Aghasur. He was sent there 
by Kansa. Seeing the boys playing, he felt extremely jealous. Knowing that 
Krishna had killed his brothers Bakasur and sister Pootana. It seemed an ideal 
moment for the demon to avenge the death of his siblings. 
Thinking thus, the demon took guise of python and lay in the way and opening 
his mouth like an opening of a cave. The cowherds too fell in his trap. Thus 
driven by curiosity, all the cowherds entered the demon mouth one by one. 
When Lord Krishna saw that his friends had entered demon's mouth. He too 
entered it to protect them. Aghasur wanted to masticate the cowherds 
including Lord Krishna; but the Lord increased his body and choked demon 
throat. Now the breath of demon stopped. His eyes rolled over and at last his 
life left his body through Brahmrandhra (cosmic pore). With his ambrosial eye, 
Lord resurrected these dead fellows and their cattles and together they came 
out of the demon's mouth. As soon as the demon died, a divine flame 
emerged from the python's mouth. It waited there sometime for God. And 
when Lord Krishna came out, the flame mingled with him. 
ATTACHMENT OF BRAHMA, STEALING OF CATTLE and COWHERDS  
Shukdev says: Parikshit, the cowherds told the tale of Aghasur's salvation to 
their parents only after a year of the incidence. During that period of one year, 
Lord Krishna multiplied himself and took the guise of his fellow cowherd and 
their stock of cattles to remove the Illusion of Brahma,who was the cause of 
the following incidence. 
After Aghasur's life mingled with God, Lord Krishna came with this fellow 
cowherd on the bank of Yamuna. They left their cattles to graze freely and 

904 
 



they sat together to take their lunch. All of the cowherds tasted one-another's 
food, as they wanted to feed Krishna with the tasty food. 
Meanwhile surprised by Aghasur's salvation, Brahma too had arrived their and 
saw Krishna eating food defiled by the cowherds. With that sight, Brahma 
grew suspicious if Krishna was indeed an incarnation of lord. Thus driven by 
the illusion and to test the authenticity of lord's incarnation, Brahma 
kidnapped all the cattles first and when Krishna went out to search the cattles 
Brahma kidnapped and concealed the cowherds also. Soon Lord Krishna 
understood the craftiness of Brahma, so he multiplicated himself into his 
fellow cowherds and cattles. Replicas resembled truly to the cowherds in 
appearance, complexion, nature, activities, voice, sticks and even in costumes. 
The replicas remain in existence for complete one year. 
Back there, when Brahma returned after hiding the cowherds and the cattles, 
he was stunned to see the cowherds and cattles as usual. Brahma was feeling 
dizzy when Lord bestowed his grace on him. Brahma saw Narayana in every 
dust particle. Brahma therefore bowed his head at the feet of Lord and said: 
"O lord, I submit before you. You can be won only with devotion and not by 
ego. No one can know your omnipresent appearance. Thus praying and 
worshipping Lord Narayana, Brahma returned to his abode.  
Shukdev says: The cowherds remained separated from God for one year. But 
they felt as if only half a second had passed because of the illusionary 
influence of God. That is why they related the incidence of Aghasurs killing to 
their parents only after a year it took place. 
SALVATION OF DHENUKASUR  
When Krishna and Balarama entered sixth year of their ages, they got the 
permission to take the cattles out for grazing. Along with their fellow 
cowherds the two brothers too began to take their cattle to Vrindavana. Thus 
they sanctified the earth of Vrindavana with their pious feet. Seeing the 
beauty of Vrindavana, with beautiful, colourful flowers and sweet fruits, Lord 
Krishna felt overjoyed. He then used to graze his cattles at the foothills of 

905 
 



Govardhan and on the banks of Yamuna River. Playing flute was his favourite 
pass time. One day Krishna's beloved friend Sudama said: Kanhaiya, there is a 
beautiful forest name Talvana. It has uncountable numbers of trees laden with 
ripe fruits. But a formidable demon Dhenukasur guards that forest, He is very 
strong. So no one, even animals and birds, doesn't go there. But we are 
tempted to eat those sweet delicious fruits. If you and Dau (Balarama) wish, 
we may go there and eat those delicious fruits." Thus hearing this, Krishna and 
Balarama guided all of them to Talvana. There they shook the trees and in no 
time a heap of ripe, delicious fruits gathered under the trees. All the cowherds 
began to eat fruits. While eating, they were also making lot of noises. 
Disturbed by the sound of fruits falling and noise of the cowherds, the demon 
Dhenukasur arrived there as a donkey. He was braying loudly and tried to hit 
Balarama, but Balarama caught him by his hind legs and threw him in the air. 
The demon died in an instance. Since that day, everyone visited Talvana 
fearlessly and the cattles grazed there freely. 
GRACE ON KALIYA THE NAGA  
One day, Bala-Krishna arrived on the banks of Yamuna with their friends. 
Balarama was not with them that day. The water of the river Yamuna was 
toxicated by the poison of Kaliya- The Naga. It was exceptionally hot that day 
and all the cowherds and cattles were very thirsty. So without giving any 
thought, they all drank the water from Yamuna and died. But Lord Krishna 
resurrected them by his ambrosial sight. 
Then Lord Krishna decided to purify the waters of Yamuna. Thus tying a cloth 
round his waist, Krishna climbed a Cadamb tree and jumped into the river. In 
the water the Lord started playing and splashing water. Soon the waves began 
to rise high. When Kaliya- the Naga heard the noise. 
He got extremely angry and appeared before Krishna. He saw a beautiful, 
tender, dark complexioned boy playing joyfully in the waters. He stung him 
and tied him in his spirals. Tied in the spirals of Kaliya, Lord became absolutely 
motionless. Seeing Krishna in death like situation, all the cowherds and even 
the cows felt very sorry. Just then Lord freed himself from the hold of Kaliya. 

906 
 



Then a game of hide and seek began between them. Lord dodged the Naga for 
a long time. Thereafter he rode on Kaliya's hood and began to dance there. 
The followers of God, like Gandharvas etc. began to play Mridang, Dhol etc. to 
give him a company. Tired from the blows of lord's feet, Kaliya soon began to 
vomit blood. Naga's wives began to pray God, "O lord, your incarnation is to 
punish the evil ones for their sins. You have shown your grace on us also. We 
are fortunate to have a sight and touch of your feet. Pity O lord. 
This Naga can no longer bear your momentum. He will die. We are all your 
slaves. Kaliya is our lord. Kindly forgive him." With kindness, Lord released 
Kaliya, who prayed thus: O Lord in your creation we snakes represent 
Tamoguna (dark virtues). We are confused by your illusions." Lord dictated 
Kaliya to migrate with his family to Ramnakdweep. Since then water of 
Yamuna became pure for humans and animals. 
DRINKING OF DAVANAL (FOREST FIRE)  
After defeating Kaliya, Lord Krishna and all other people of Vraj felt extremely 
tired. They were very hungry and thirsty also. So they did not go back to 
Vrindavana, but stayed on the bank of Yamuna in the night. Because of 
intense heat of summer, surrounding forests had been Srivelled. 
At midnight those Srivelled forests caught fire and the sleeping people were 
engulfed by it. They awakened startled and took shelter at Krishna. Seeing 
their horrified appearance, Lord Krishna drank the infernal forest fire and thus 
saved the lives of innocent people who had rested their live's at him with 
faith. 
SALVATION OF PRALAMBASUR  
One day, Balarama and Krishna were playfully grazing their cattles along with 
other cowherds in the forests. When a demon Pralamb arrived there with an 
intention of kidnapping Krishna and Balarama. The demon had come in the 
guise of a cowherd, but the God easily recognised him. 
They accepted his proposal of friendship, but were thinking about the way for 
his salvation. God thereafter summoned all his friends and said: "Pals, today 

907 
 



we shall divide ourselves in to two teams and play joyfully. Thus the teams 
were divided and each team chose Krishna and Balarama as its captain 
respectively. It was stipulated that the members of defeated team would carry 
the members of winner team on their back up to the place pointed by them. 
Thus the game began and soon both the teams reached a secluded place. 
At one time, the team headed by Balarama won. So the members of Krishna's 
team were to carry them on their back. Demon Pralambasur offered Balarama 
a ride on his back. Balarama agreed to ride on the demon's back; but as soon 
as he rode on the demon's back, the demon galloped. But he could not go far 
for not being able to bear Balarama's weight. Them the demon regained his 
huge formidable size and tried to escape by flying. First Balarama felt 
terrorized but soon he realised his real powers and hit on the demon's head 
with a powerful fist. The blow shattered demon's head and he fell on earth 
dead like a huge mountain. 
VENU GEET  
Sri Shukadeva says: "O king, most of the time of Lord Krishna's boyhood 
passed in Vrindavana. 
There he grazed cattles and played flute. His flute had a divine, enchanting 
sound.The Gopis (girls) gathered around him under the influence of 
enchanting tunes."They also heard the enchanting Venu geet that fills one 
hearts with the memory of Bhagavat. 
One of the girl said to her friend: "O dear friend, Having the privilege of seeing 
Lords beauty and receving his kindness is the real salvation. Another girl said: 
"O friend, what penance this flute had observed that it has got a closer 
contact with lips of Nandnandan (an epithet for Krishna). 
Even the siblings of this flute, trees and other vegetation's are pleased with its 
fortune and are hence showering their leaves and flowers on him." One more 
said: "O friend, look, even Bhagavati Lakshmi has left her luxurious abode in 
Vaikunth and arrived in Vrindavana to have a look of Lord Devakinandan." A 
Gopi expressed her jealousy: "Even this doe is better than us, O friends, look 

908 
 



how engrossed is she looking at God, that her eyes are not blinking." Hearing 
the sweet enchanting tunes of flute even the heavenly elves gather in the sky 
over Vrindavana. They also see the beauty of Lord Krishna and showered the 
flowers of their braids on him. Even the cows forgot grazing when then heard 
the enchanting music of flute. The calves too forgot drinking milk and began 
to look at Lord Krishna with joy. This is the real devotion for Lord Krishna. You 
have to forget yourself in order to find him. Condition of girls of Vrindavana 
was exactly the same. After having the sight of Lord Krishna they remembered 
nothing; not even the way back to home. They stood in the forests in a trance, 
completely tired, unaware of their self. 
A girl said pointing to the fauna: "Look O friends, look at these birds. Do you 
know that these birds were the saints and sages in their previous births. In this 
birth also they are sitting in a state of trance. Look they have forgotten their 
knowledge hearing the sweet enchanting music of the flute. And look at 
Yamunaji. She is also ale to contain her exhilaration. She is eagerly spalshing 
her waves to wash lords feet. Yet another girl said: "Look friends the clouds 
cannot see their Lord scorching in the sun. So they have covered the sun and 
shaded Lord Krishna. Now they are drizzling as if showering petals." A girl said: 
"Friends, look, these Bheelanis are better than us. 
They have such a strong urge of Krishna's sight that when Govind returns 
home, they smear their body with dusts of his feet. Blessed is this mountain 
which has dedicated its entire self in the feet of Brajnandan and feels 
overjoyed. It is his supreme devotee. Kanhaiya has infused even nonliving 
things with life by his sweet tunes of flute. 
STEALING OF CLOTHES  
The unmarried girls of Vrindavana felt as if their lives were dedicated to Lord 
Krishna. Each of them wished heartly to have Lord Krishna as her husband. So 
in order to get their desire fulfilled, all of the spinster girls of Vraj began to 
take bath in Yamuna early in morning of Hemant season and worshipped 
Goddess Katyayani. When MadanMohan learned that the spinsters girls 
wished to marry him. He went to see them at dawn. The girls were bathing 

909 
 



naked in the river; Their clothes were kept on the bank. Lord Krishna stealthy 
took those clothes and climbed on a Cadamb tree. Lord had not stolen their 
clothes with malicious intentions. He had stolen them to remove their flaws 
and make them realize their real appearance that they were not mere girls, 
but pure souls. Without realization of the real self, one can not experience the 
God. 
The girl were in fact the hymns of Vedas, Sadhana, Siddhis, Sages and 
Brahmvidyas (Vedas) themselves, that took the guise of girls to enjoy the 
vicinity of God. God removed their clothes that symbolized lust. Because of 
the lords grace they all were able to enjoy God's company. 
Shukadeva says: "O Parikshit, Thus Lord Krishna removed the shyness of the 
girls of Vraj through his sweet talks. He derided at them, made them dance 
like puppets and even stole their clothes when they were bathing naked, but 
they did not deter his actions. Instead they felt overjoyed by the close 
presence of their beloved Kanha. 
LIFTING OF GOVARDHAN  
Shukhdevji says: "O Parikshit one day, Balarama and Krishna saw that many 
delicious kind of sweetmeats were being cooked at home. With curiosity and 
politeness, they asked Nand and other elders: "Father, which festival are you 
preparing for? Which God will be worshipped? What purpose will such 
worship serve? Nand Baba explained: "Sons Devaraj Indra is the God of 
clouds. It is because of Indra's grace we get rain. So these materials are being 
prepared to worship Indra." Krishna said: Father every creature in the world 
enjoys comforts or suffers as per his fate. None of the Gods can change the 
results. Action is prime in the world. One gets the results as per his actions. 
Even Indra is God as a result of his action. Any one who performs one hundred 
Ashvamegh Yagyas, becomes Indra. But even after performing crores of 
Ashvmegh Yagyas one can not get a stay in Vraj. It is the duty of Indra to cause 
rain. So it will rain even if you don't worship Indra. But to feed the poors and 
satisfy them with clothes and other gifts is real worship. 

910 
 



By their blessing, we shall be more happier. I desire that with all these 
materials we should worship Giriraj Govardhan and distribute the prasad 
among the poors. With which their souls will be sated and will have the grace 
of God. 
Thus Lord Krishna told his father that all the people should worship unitedly 
and unitedly they should receive prasad. If you are ready to do as per my 
desire, its all right, otherwise I will not worship your haughty God, nor receive 
his prasad. 
Thus convinced by Kanhaiya's wise reasoning, all the gopas agreed to him. 
Nand Baba said, "O Krishna, we are making all these preparation for you only 
and we will do as you say. We will worship Govardhan. For us Govardhan is 
also like a God. It gives us grass, water, and fuel etc., which are necessary for 
our lives. Thus with lords, consent, they dropped their plan to worship Indra 
and resolved to worship Govardhan faithfully. 
WORSHIP OF GOVARDHAN  
On the Purnima (full moon) day in the month of Kartik (November) all the 
Gopas (people of Vraj region) gathered near mount Govardhan. During the 
night all of them circumambulated the mountain. Lord invoked the Ganges by 
his wish and bathed Govardhan with her water.Then they put vermilion on it, 
offered basil-leaves, flowers etc and worshipped it. Brahmins recited hymns in 
its praise. To make the people believe in their rituals, Lord Krishna himself 
appeared on the mountain in huge form and exclaimed: "I am Giriraj (the king 
of the mountain) and began to eat the offerings. But he as a child was still 
among the villagers who faithfully bowed before the mountain. Among them, 
the child Krishna said: "look, what a surprise Giriraj has appeared himself and 
bestowed his grace on us. He has accepted our worship." There after all the 
Gopas distributed Prasad among themselves and felt supremely 
satisfied.ANGRY RETALIATION OF INDRA Shukadeva sayd: Parikshit, when 
Indra learned that the Gopas had stopped worshipping him, he grew 
outrageous. In anger, he ordered the clouds to rain torrentially over Vraj and 
cause heavy flood in Vraj region. In no time dense clouds gathered over Vraj. 

911 
 



Soon there was lighting thunder, darkness and storm all around. Then it 
rained torrentially. All the people took refuge at Lord Krishna and prayed him 
to save them from the anger of Indra. Lord Krishna said: "Those who regard 
me as there, are mine and I am theirs, So there is no need to worry for you." 
Saying this, Lord lifted Giriraj on his little finger and called all the people of 
Vraj along with their cattles under the lee of Govardhan. Then he ordered his 
wheel Sudarshan to absorb the water of the clouds so that not even a single 
drop could fall on earth. Thus for seven days continuously Lord balanced 
Govardhan on the little finger.Thus Lord Krishna also came to be known as 
Giridhari. People who had gathered around him, just kept on seeing Lords 
moon-like face and hence did not feel thirsty or hungry.In fact the comforts 
those people got during those seven days are beyond verbal description. Lord 
held Govardhan on one hand, and conch in the other, while with the 
remaining two hands He began to play this flute. Hearing the tunes of his 
flute, all the people of Vraj began to dance with joy. After the rains stopped, 
all of them returned to their homes. 
When Indra learned about the happenings in Vraj, he soon realised his 
mistake. Indra himself reached Vraj and begged Lord for his pardon. Then he 
gave Lord a ceremonial bath with the milk of Surabhi. For protecting the cows, 
thus the Lord also got one more name "Govind". 
RAS LEELA  
Shukadeva related to Parikshit the tale of Kamadev's humiliation. Sridhar 
Swami calls Rasleela as Kama-vijay leela (defeating of Kamadeva- Hindu 
equivalent of cupid). Jagad guru Ballabhacharyaji decribes it as Lords Divy 
Vihar (divine enjoyment). The purpose of describing this tale is just that 
common people should reflect on the selfless love of Gopis for Lord Krishna 
and experience the love of God for them as well. 
Lord is an embodiment of Rasa (Pleasure): After conquering Brahma and other 
Gods, ego of Kamadev had surged to great heights. He, therefore, requested 
God to quench his thirst for war. God invited Kamadev to visit Vrindavana on 
the night of Sharad Purnima (Full moon night) in season preceding winter), 

912 
 



and told him that on that divine night. He would enjoy the company of crores 
of Gopis. "If I have slightest passion for any of them, you will win, otherwise 
you will lose." That night Lord Krishna added more divinity, more brilliance to 
it with a resolution of Ras with the help of Yogmaya (personified illusion). It 
was a perfect night for the purpose - flowers bloomed in Vrindavana, full 
moon shone, and gentle, cool breeze blew from the banks of river Yamuna. 
Amidst this stimulating ambience Lord Krishna began to play an enchanting 
tune on his flute. The tune attracted Gopis,their passion surged to its zenith 
and under the influence of love for Lord Krishna and as if in trance, all of them 
ran to meet their beloved Kanhaiya leaving all their fear, Bondages, patience 
and shyness behind. Some of them were intercepted by their husbands and 
dragged back to home. But only their physical bodies stayed put, their souls 
reached Vrindavana. 
In Vrindavana on the bank of Yamuna, Gopis saw Vrindavana Vihari (epithet 
for Krishna) near their familiar cadamb tree. Yogmaya adorned all the Gopis 
from tip to toe. In fact those Gopis were not ordinary women. 
Parikshit asked: "Gopis had not regarded Krishna as Parbrahma. What was the 
basis for their passion then? Shukadeva said: "When a wretched person like 
Shishupal, who always abused Lord Krishna could find supreme position, there 
should be no doubt for Gopis who had such a profound passion for Lord." So 
Gopis arrived and gathered around Lord Krishna. 
To test their devotion and to enhance the honor of Kamadev, Krishna said to 
them: "O Gopis, the pure ones, it is not fit for you to stay here at this hour of 
night. Go and serve your husbands. 
Your duties must be first to your husband's children and cows. They will be 
waiting for you eagerly. Go and console them. You can gain me by hearing, 
reciting, seeing etc. You need not sit here. Go to your homes." Gopis, however 
said: "Govind, we have come to you leaving all the mundane lusts behind. 
Now going back is like ruining over lives.It is the greatest misfortune if 
someone returns to mundane affairs even after being at your feet." These 
words that reflected divine feelings of Gopis pleased Lord. He began to enjoy 

913 
 



their company. But a feeling of ego began to creep in the minds of Gopis 
because of lord's closeness. They began to assume themselves as highly 
fortunate. To remove their ego, Lord disappeared right among them. 
PITIABLE CONDITION OF GOPIS IN GOD'S ABSENCE  
After the disappearance of God, Gopis were perplexed. Their hearts burned 
with desire. They had dedicated their entire selves in the feet of Lord. They 
were entirely merged in the love of Krishna. Thus driven by passion, Gopis 
began to search Lord Krishna. They asked trees, creepers, vegetations for the 
whereabouts of their beloved. They then spotted His footprints at one place. 
Footprints of Radha were also there. 'Indeed He would have carried her, that 
great fortunate one, on His shoulders.' They thought. 
Lord had indeed, after disappearing from amidst Gopis, taken Radha to an 
isolated place. She had then began to think herself superior to other Gopis. So 
at one place, she said: "O Lord, I can't walk now. My tender feet are tired. 
Kindly carry me on your shoulders to wherever you wish." At her request, Lord 
Krishna agreed to carry her on his shoulder. But as soon as she proceeded to 
ride, Lord disappeared from there also. Now, Radhaj began to cry and wail and 
fainted. At the same time, other Gopis also reached there and found Radha 
lying unconscious on the ground. All of them including Radha then returned to 
the bank of Yamuna and began to wait for Krishna's appearance. 
GOPIKA GEET  
O Lord, your incarnation has increased the glory of Vrajbhumi. Even the glory 
of Vaikunth, Goddess Lakshmi herself came to stay in Vraj. Govind we have 
dedicated our lives at your feet. 
Now we are searching you everywhere. O MadanMohan, kindly show your 
beautiful, face once. 
Prananath, your eyes, that are even more beautiful than the lotus that bloom 
in ponds, is pricking our hearts. We are all your slaves. If you kill us by your 
separation, will not you be criticised. O Purushaottam, you have protected us 
on many occasions. You are the remover of miseries of Vraj people. O Lord, 

914 
 



you are not the son of Yashoda only, but you are the soul of all the living 
beings. At the request of Brahma, you have arrived on earth to remove her 
burden. Why don't you protect us, our lives are in danger because of your 
separation. 
O Lord, your tales are like ambrosia. Your ambrosial tales pacify those who are 
inflicted with mundane obstacles, and sorrows. They are indeed great and 
fortunate who recite your tales. O Purushaottam, for the musics of your flute 
we gave up everything - our husbands, children, social bindings everything. 
We even dedicated our lives for the sake of your love. Now nothing amuses us 
except you. We are living, only to have a sight of you; now you are wandering 
from forest to forest with your tender feet, which even we did not bear in our 
hearts for the fears of hurting them. How much would they be suffering? We 
are fainting in your worry. O the dearest one, we were yours, we are yours 
and we shall be yours forever." Saying these words Gopis burst into tears. 
Shukdev says: Parikshit, when the beloved Gopis burst into tears, Krishna's 
patience gave away. 
His heart melted at their condition and He appeared amidst them. A sweet 
smile played on his beautiful face. He wore a garland of fresh Vaijayanti 
flowers and yellow clothes. His beauty could have moved even Kamadev. 
Seeing their beloved Kanha once again amidst them, Gopis got a new lease of 
life. All of them began to embrace Lord and thus quench the fire of separation 
that was burning their bodies. 
Thereafter, along with the beauties of Vraj, Lord came to the bank of Yamuna. 
Gopis put their queries before him for solution. Lord said: "O beloved Gopis, I 
do not reciprocate to the desire of my beloved ones for physical love. Because 
of it their conscience remains always engrossed in me. Hence, I take to hiding 
even after meeting so that you could feel complete imbibement in me. 
MAHARAS  
From the words of the Lord, Gopis forgot the pains of separation. From the 
closeness of their beloved, their lives were successful now. With those Gopis, 

915 
 



Lord Krishna started Maharas on the pious banks of river Yamuna. All the 
Gods gathered in sky to witness that divine festival. Gopis were even more 
fortunate than Lakshmi. But even amidst crores of Gopis, who were eager to 
devote their everything to Him, Lord completely refrained from desires, 
feelings and even actions. Thus Lord defeated even Kamadev and removed his 
ego. 
SALVATION OF SUDARSHAN AND SHANKHCUR 
Shukdev says: O Parikshit, once on the occasion of Lord Shivaratri, Nand Baba 
and all other Gopas drove their carts with families and reached Ambikavana 
on a pilgrimage tour. There they took bath in the river Saraswati and with 
devotion worshiped Lord Lord Shiva and Parvati. They also observed day long 
fast and decided to pass their night on the bank of Saraswati. But that place 
was inhabited by a huge python. During the night: the python emerged and 
caught hold of Nand's leg. Nandbaba cried loudly. All the Gopas gathered 
around him. He cried again: "Kanhaiya, This snake is all set to strangulate me. 
Save me." Lord touched the python with his feet and instaneously, the python 
vanished. In its place appeared a divine-looking human. He said: "O Lord, I was 
a Vidyadhar named Sudarshan. I was so much obsessed with my beauty, 
youth, luxury and comforts that I used to insult others. One day I had derided 
at the ugly appearance of the sage Angira. So indignantly he cursed me to 
become a python. But, pleased by my realization of mistake, he had told that 
when God himself would touch me, I would regain my original appearance." 
Thereafter, Sudarshan went round the God, worshiped Him and with his 
permission, departed to his abode. 
On another occasion, Lord arrived in Vrindavana during Vasant Ritu (spring 
Season). There He took part in Vasantik Ras (Ras of spring season) with the 
Gopis. During Ras itself, a demon Shankhchur tried to escape away kidnapping 
some of the Gopis. A stampede resulted among Gopis. Hearing their noise, 
Lord ran after the demon, carrying a huge Sal (shorea) tree in his hands. In no 
time He overtook the demon and killed him by just one blow. He picked up 
the gem from demon's head and handed it to Balarama. 

916 
 



SALVATION OF ARISHTASUR  
Once, Kansa sent a demon Arishtasur to Vrindavana. The demon arrived there 
in a bull's guise. 
That huge bull came to Vrindavana and began to terrorize the people with his 
loud sound. Seeing the bull, Balarama said to Krishna: "Kanhaiya, I have never 
seen such a huge bull before." All the people began to cry for help. Lord 
consoled them and challenged the bull demon: O fool, why are you terrorizing 
these cows and cowherds? I am going to shatter your ego." The challenge 
from God pinched the demon. Tapping his hooves angrily, the demon attacked 
God. 
He wished to gore Him, but God held his horns and pushed him back. Then 
kicking the demon God killed him in no time. 
KANSA SENDS AKRURA After the killing of Arishthasur, DevaRishi Narada 
visited Kansa and asked: "O Kansa, the girl who had slipped form your hand 
was in fact the daughter of Yashoda. Krishna and Balarama, who are staying in 
Vrindavana, are infact the sons of Devaki and Rohini respectively. Because of 
your fear, Vasudev has kept them under the supervision of his friend Nand. 
Those two boys have killed the demons sent by you." Hearing these words, 
Kansa shook with anger and put Vasudev and Devaki in prison again. 
Thereafter he called his minister Akrura and asked him to set out at once for 
Gokul. He said to Akrura: "Akruraji, you are an old friend and well-wisher of 
mine, Go to Gokul and bring the sons of Vasudev, who are staying at Nand's 
home. Invite them to visit Mathura, to witness the festivities of Dhannsh-
yagya." Akrura understood Kansa's intentions, but feared that if he refused, 
that demon would kill him. So he decided to visit Gokul, and also have the 
oppurtunity of seeing God. He was feeling overwhelmed by the mere thought 
of it. Next day, he set out on a grand chariot to meet his supreme Lord in 
Gokul.Meditating in the feet of Lord, Akrura was heading towards Vrindavana. 
He was feeling himself as the most fortunate one for he was sure to have a 
sight of Lord. Thus obsessed with many kinds of devotional feelings, Akrura 

917 
 



alighted from the chariot at the border of Vrindavana and started walking. He 
found it unjust to ride a chariot on the land of Vrindavana where Lord Krishna 
treaded. By the time, he reached Vrindavana, Lord Krishna and Balarama had 
returned home after grazing their cattles. Seeing them, Akrura fell at their 
feet. Both the brothers raised Akrura and addressed him as "Chacha" 
(uncle),and escorted him into the house. 
Akrura was given a warm welcome and treatment there. After the dinner, 
they assembled in Nand's drawing room. Nand inquired about the reason of 
his sudden arrival. Akrura said: "Kansa is organizing a wrestling competition in 
Mathura. He has invited all the big and small kings to the competitions. He has 
invited you with Krishna and Balarama as well. Beautiful Mathura is worth 
seeing. Gullible Nand felt pleased by Akrura's talking and said: "King Kansa has 
shown a great honor to me. He has sent invitation only to other kings, but has 
sent his minister to call me and a golden chariot for my kids." So it was 
announced in Gokul that all the people would go to Mathura the next day and 
witness the festivities there. 
DEPARTURE OF KRISHNA AND BALARAMA FOR MATHURA  
When the Gopis heard about Krishna leaving Gokul to visit Mathura, they 
began to wail and cry. 
They were getting so much restless by the news that, they felt, their lives 
would end before the sunrise. They started imprecating fate that it had no 
kindness. First it provided them with a closer contact with their beloved 
Kanha, now it was causing a long separation from him. Some of Gopis even 
begged for death, they felt it better than living without Kanha. All the Gopis 
kept on crying and wailing nightlong. 
Mother Yashoda awoke early in the morning next day. She churned out butter 
and adding MiSri (sugar candies), she took it to Krishna to feed him. But there 
she found that both Krishna and Balarama were getting ready to set out for 
Mathura. They held mother's feet and said: "Pardon us, O mother, we are 
going to Mathura." These words disturbed Yashoda. She ran and fell at 

918 
 



Akrura's feet and said: "I am your slave. O Akrura, please do not take my 
beloved sons to Mathura. They are inseparable from my heart. Why Kansa has 
summoned them to Mathura. O Akrura, go and tell him to take everything 
from us, but spare our sons. We are also ready to live in jail, but can't lose our 
beloved sons." Akrura consoled Yashoda. "Bhabhi (sister-in-law), don't worry. 
These two brothers are going to Mathura to witness the festivities there and 
will return soon to comfort your heart." Yashoda said: "Akruraji, Mathura is a 
town of gold and both of my sons are too young yet to be needed there for 
any reason." Touching the feet of Nand and Yashoda, both the brothers said: 
"Father, mother, we will definitely return. Presently we wish to see the 
grandeur of Mathura." Meanwhile all the Gopis and Gopas had gathered 
there. Crying and wailing, the Gopis said: "You are very Cruel, O Akrura, who 
named you as Akrura. You have come here to lacerate our hearts." Second 
Gopi said: "No friend, it is not a fault of Akrura. Our complaints are with 
Shyamsundar. We left everything, our husbands, children, our homes and 
dedicated our entire selves in your service. And now you are deserting us so 
ruthlessly. We have no support for our life except you, O Madhusadan." 
Saying this, all the Gopis burst into tears again. 
All the Gopas, including Sridama surrounded the chariot and said: "O Krishna 
we had not even dreamt that you would desert us so ruthlessly. O Kanhaiya 
we have seen with our eyes that even Indra, Varuna, Sanakadi and Brahma 
bow before you. But we have never regarded you as God. 
We regarded you as our friend. Are you angry with us? O my childhood friend 
Kanhaiya, we request you, we will never abuse you in future. If you were 
intending to go, why did you, then save us from the infernal forest fire. Why 
did you save from the deluging rains? We cannot live without you. Tell us O 
benevolent friend, When will you return." Lord Krishna consoled them all and 
took many of them with Him. The chariot began to move. As long as the flag of 
the chariot remained visible, people kept on crying and wailing. Even the eyes 
of Akrura filled with tears. 

919 
 



Lord asked him: "Kaka, why are you weeping?" Akrura replied: "O Lord, Kansa 
is the great sinner. I feel he will try to torment you by all means. So, my heart 
says, that I should take you back to Vrindavana, because if Kansa did any harm 
to you, their spirits will curse me for ever."  
AKRURA HAS A SIGHT OF LORD IN FOUR-ARMED FORM  
Hearing Akrura's words, Lord understood that when he had arrived in Vraj, he 
was afflicted with a feeling of majesty. But now, it has been replaced by 
affection now. He, therefore decided to remove his dilemma. Thus, Lord said 
to him: "Kaka, Mathura is still some distance away. So you take a bath in 
Yamuna. We brothers are waiting for you in the chariot." As soon as Akrura 
took a dip in Yamuna, Lord showed him a sight of His abode Vaikunth and his 
Narayana's appearance in which, he was holding conch, wheel, mace and 
lotus in each of his four hands and was lying on the bed of Sheshnaga. With 
folded hands, Akrura prayed to lord: "O lord, you are the reason for the 
existence of Brahma and the Universe. O Lord, I pray at your feet again and 
again. Now I recognise you. You are the one who took the incarnations of 
Matsya, Kachchap, Varaha, Narsinh, Vamana, Rama etc. Thus after bath and 
worship, Akrura returned to the chariot. Lord Krishna understood that now a 
devotional feeling had arisen in the mind of Akrura for Narayana. Lord asked: 
"Your condition seems miserable. Did you see anything extraordinary under 
water?" Akrura said: "O Lord, now bestow your grace on me. Kindly come to 
my home and accept my hospitality."  
ARRIVAL IN MATHURA AND GRACE ON KUBJA  
After the departure of Akrura, Nandbaba too set out for Mathura along with 
the Gopas. On the way itself, they caught up with Krishna and Balarama. All of 
them then reached Mathura together. There they stayed in a garden. After 
sometime, with Nand's permission, both the brothers set out to see the city of 
Mathura. Mathura was indeed a beautiful town. All the residents of Mathura 
thronged on roads, roofs and attices to have a sight of Krishna and 
Balarama.On the way, they met a pretty but hunched women. She introduced 
herself as Kubja, the maid of Kansa. Her duty was to smear the members of 

920 
 



the royal family with sandal-wood paste. God asked her if she would smear 
him with sandal paste. Kubja said: "O Manmohan, I see no one more fitting 
than you for the sandal paste." Thus she smeared Lord's forehead with 
saffron. On Balaram's forehead she smeared musk containing sandal paste, 
other Gopas smeared all the remaining sandal paste on their heads. 
Lord then, put His feet on Kubja's and holding her chin gave her head a slight 
jerk. And in no time, Kubja's hunch was gone and she turned into a pretty 
woman. She begged Lord for His love. 
The Lord promised her a meeting in future, and proceeded ahead. 
After saving Kubja, Lord Krishna and other Gopas moved ahead. At a place 
they saw a huge bow kept on a high stage. Many strong men were guarding it. 
Lord entered the canopy and easily lifted the bow and broke it into pieces. 
There was a big applause from all around. Dau said: "Krishna, now the crowd 
will increase here, so let us escape in time. Thus, both the brothers and their 
friends beat a retreat to their camp. There they rested for night. There in 
Mathura, breaking of the bow had frightened Kansa. He could not sleep during 
the night. Even in his dreams, he saw nothing, but Krishna everywhere around 
him. 
KILLING OF ELEPHANT  
Early in the morning, Kansa summoned his minister and ordered him to make 
Kuvalayapeed, the elephant to stand in the center of the main gate. He 
thought that the elephant would kill both the boys if they dared to enter the 
fort through main gate. Back there in the garden, Krishna and Balarama set 
out in wrestlers guise for the fort. At the gate, seein an elephant blocking the 
passage, they asked mahout loudly: "O Mahout, why have you made the 
elephant stand in the center of the gate. Move it either ahead or back." But 
instead of moving the elephant out of the passage, the mahout steered it right 
on them. But before elephant could attack them, Balarama caught its trunk, 
while Krishna caught its tail. Both the brothers then dragged the elephant out 

921 
 



of the gate and lofted it in the air. The elephant fell on the ground with a loud 
thud and died on the spot. 
SALVATION OF WRESTLERS  
Kansa felt very nervous by the news of elephant's killing. Before he could take 
stock of the situation, Lord Krishna and Balarama arrived in the amphitheatre. 
The spectators present in the amphitheatre saw Lord as per their feelings. The 
menfolk saw Lord as a Jewel among the men. 
Womenfolk saw him as an incarnation of Kamadev. Cowherds saw their 
natural friend in Lord, while to Kansa He appeared as his death. But to his 
mother and father, Devaki and Vasudev and to Nand, Krishna and Balarama 
appeared as small kids. Sages and ascetics saw nothing but metaphysical 
coming in boys' guise. Learned ones sighted His cosmic form while to Yadavas 
He appeared as their tutelery God. 
As soon as the Lord and Balarama arrived in the ring, the wrestlers, who were 
already present there, stood up like springs. A wrestler Chanur dragged 
Krishna and one named Mushtik dragged Balarama into the ring. They said to 
them: "Both of you and we are the subjects of the great king Kansa. It is our 
duty to please our king with our art and skill. More over we will receive many 
rewards also." Krishna said: "O wrestlers, you please fight among yourselves. 
We are boys yet, so we shall witness your fight from a distance." Chanur said: 
"No you are neither boy nor teenagers. You are stronger than the strongest. 
You have just killed an elephant which was stronger than thousand 
elephants." Thus, both the brothers were compelled to wrestle with the royal 
wrestlers. Mushtik was beaten on the ground by Balarama so hard that he 
died at once on the spot. Krishna similarly killed second wrestler Chanur. All 
the remaining wrestlers met similar fate one by one. The massive crowd 
present there applauded them joyfully. 
SALVATION OF KANSA  
Seeing the shameful defeat of his wrestlers, Kansa infuriated with anger and 
proclaimed: "Tie all the opponents; tie Ugarsen, Devaki, Vasudev, Nand in 

922 
 



ropes and bring them before me." Lord Krishna could not tolerate this and in a 
single jump, He reached on the stage where Kansa was present. Lord Krishna 
caught him by hair and said: "O Kansa, once you have caught a helpless 
woman by hair, I have avenged that insult. Now you will receive the fruits for 
your atrocities." Saying this, Lord began to twirl Kansa catching him by hair, 
and threw him down from the stage. 
Then Lord jumped once again and landed on the chest of Kansa. Kansa died 
instantaneously. 
Thus, Kansa who was an incarnation of the demon Kalnemi received salvation. 
Lord Krishna then, released his parents from the prison and crowned his 
maternal grand father Ugrasen as the king of Mathura. 
YAGYOPAVIT OF KRISHNA AND BALARAMA  
After the successful completion of all the royal ceremonies, the consecration 
of Krishna and Balarama was carried out. Thereafter, they came to stay at the 
hermitage of sage Sandipani for formal education. Extraordinarily brilliant 
Krishna successfully learned all the knowledge in short period of time. Then, 
as GuruDakshaina (paying respect to the teacher) Krishna brought back his 
dead sons from the abode of Yamaraj. Taking his convocational bath, 
thereafter, Lord Krishna returned to Mathura. There, though living among 
royal luxuries and grandeur Lord Krishna remained indifferent. Memory of his 
sentimental, beloved devotees friend and other people of Vraj kept on 
pricking him. 
SENDING UDDHAVA AS MESSENGER  
Savant Uddhava, the son of Yadava's minister Brihaspati was an intimate 
friend of Lord Krishna. 
Only he had the permission to enter Lord's sanctum. Seeing his friend Krishna 
in remorse, Uddhava asked: "Mathuranath, you seem to be upset. What is 
troubling you?" Lord Krishna replied: "Uddhava, I feel perplexed. I remember 
my days in Vrindavana. Please go to Vrindavana and get the news regarding 
Gopis there. Also give them my message." Thus Lord Krishna donned Uddhava 

923 
 



in his attire and sent him to Vraj in his chariot. There he stayed at Nand's 
home. At night, Uddhava enquired about Nand and Yashoda's well being and 
about Vraj in general. That whole might passed in chatting. 
BHRAMAR GEET  
Next day, when the Gopis got the news of Uddhava's arrival, they thronged in 
and around Nand's residence. They recognized the chariot parked in front of 
the gate. It was the same chariot on which Krishna and Balarama had 
departed for Mathura. First they thought that their beloved Krishna had 
returned. But their belief did not last long. Some of them opined that Akrura 
might have come again. But what for? But then someone informed that it was 
Uddhava, Krishna's Savant friend, who had come to preach them about 
metaphysical knowledge. Soon afterwards, Uddhava came out and spoke out 
loud: "O Gopis, listen to the preaching of Uddhava." But instead of listening to 
him, Gopis covered their ears. Feeling insulted, Uddhava expressed his 
dissatisfaction over their behaviour. 
Gopis said to him: O gentleman, firstly we are not familiar with you, secondly 
we have no capacity to hear your preaching. Yes if you wish to give us a 
message of our most beloved; thousand of ears are eager to hear that." 
Uddhava then introduced himself as the intimate friend of Lord Krishna. 
Knowing his identify Gopis welcome and treated Uddhava warmly. Uddhava 
then began to say again: "O Gopis, the person, whom you are declaring as 
your beloved friend, in fact has no mother, no father. He has no form, no 
colour and no body. He is above all, non-existing all pervasive and the giver of 
joy. He is never separate from his devotee and beloved ones. All of you, too, 
feel the presence of that Supreme Being and be happy forever." Gopis said: 
"Uddhava, as long as Ghanashyam stayed with us, we saw endless virtues in 
him. But only within six months of his stay in Mathura, you wiped out all of his 
virtues and turned him virtueless. 
Tell us with which mouth did he eat butter, with which hand did he break our 
pitchers, with which feet did he pasture cows in the forests and with which 

924 
 



feet did he dance on the hood of Kaliya. Was he another Krishna?" Harsh 
reaction of the Gopis startled Uddhava. He began to think where he had been 
caught. His knowledge of Vedant was proving ineffective on the Gopis. Who 
are sunk in so much love. On the other hand, Gopis too were feeling 
embarassed for treating the guest bitterly. But they were also not prepared to 
listen to such preaching that condemned love. Moreover, they had let out 
their long accumulating feeling. 
Meanwhile a bumblebee perched at Radha's feet mistaking them for lotus. 
Pointing to it, all the Gopis said: "Beware O bumblebee, beware if you dare to 
touch the feet of our Radha. It appears that you are a disciple of Krishna. 
There is now no secret regarding the virtues and actions of your friend. But it 
is good that he and you tied in friendship. You are black and your friend has a 
black heart. Virtues of both of you are same. 
First He imbibed us in His love; then left us ruthlessly forever. He is not sorry 
for us. But why does Lakshmi serves in those feet? She must be careful, lest 
she should be deceived like us. O bumblebee you also appear to be a 
polymath who has come here to preach us. But you won't get an audience in 
Braj. You should better go to Mathura. 
There is one Kubja go and relate your tale to her. You will receive ample 
donations from her. 
What will you get from the Gopis here? They have already lost their mental 
balance, because of their separation from the beloved Krishna. If you have 
come to ask, why we loved Krishna. O bumblebee, we have no knowledge. But 
we know that our love for Krishna was not a mistake. 
Even the Goddess Lakshmi does not leave His feet for a moment. Why should 
we leave his feet then? But O bumblebee, have you really come to convince 
us. When He could not come out of shame, He sent you to console us - the 
deaf and dumb Gopis, But be careful if you put your head at the feet of Radha. 
Get away, we have already seen enough of flattery and flirtation of your 
friend. Deserting our affection for ephemeral things, we loved that eternal 

925 
 



one. but He too abandoned us. Can you guess about our condition? Tell us, O 
Uddhava, shall we ever get the sight of Sri Krishna again? Hearing the tragic 
tale of the Gopis, Uddhava too felt very sorry for them. He felt as if 
Mathuranath, Lord Krishna was indeed neglecting those Gopis. Uddhava 
stayed in Vrindavana for six months. There he saw every place, every spot 
where Lord Krishna had played once. When he was returning to Mathura, 
mother Yashoda presented him with butter, Radha gave him the flute. Thus 
immersed in the love and overwhelmed by its feelings, Uddhava reached 
Mathura. 
He said to Krishna: "Lord, the real appearance of love, that I saw in Vrindavana 
is the only truth." Sri Krishna said: "Uddhava, You are weeping. Just look at 
me." Uddhava looked at him with wide, opened eyes. In every single hair of 
Lord, there existed Gopis. Uddhava was indeed a Savant. But Lord had sent 
him to Braj only to be taught a lesson of love. 
BATTLES WITH JARASANDH AND CONSTRUCTION OF DWARIKAPURI  
After the death of Kansa his widowed queens Asti and Prapti returned to their 
father Jarasandh's home and informed him that Krishna and Balarama had 
killed their husband Kansa. Infuriated by the news, Jarasandh at once 
launched a massive attack on Mathura. The people of Mathura were 
frightened by the strength of Jarasandh's army. Lord Krishna too fell in deep 
thought. Just then, divine weapons and chariots appeared from the heaven. 
Both the brothers took the weapons and boarded their chariots. Then they 
fought a fierce battle and slayed all the army of Jarasandh. 
Balarama furiously caught Jarasandh and was about to kill him. But Lord 
Krishna stopped him. They then released Jarasandh and let him go unhurt. 
Jarasandh felt ashamed that Krishna released him because of his helpless 
condition. 
Shukdev says: O Parikshit, despite his shameful defeat, Jarasandh attacked 
Mathura seventeen times with huge armies. But every time, the Lord defeated 
him and released him in kindness. 

926 
 



And every time Jarasandh felt more humiliated."At last, instead of attacking 
Mathura himself, Jarasandh sent Kalyavan to defeat Sri Krishna. 
Kalyavan launched an attack on Mathura with one crore strong Malechchh 
army. This time Lord Krishna decided to vacate Mathura instead of countering 
the attack. 
He got Dwarikapuri constructed by Vishvakarma and settled all the people of 
Mathura there. 
Then, unarmed, Lord Krishna walked past Kalyavan. Pointed by Narada, 
Kalyavan at once recognised Krishna and gave Him a chase. He also challenged 
Him, but the Lord did not listen to his challenges and kept moving with face 
turned away. Kalyavan chased Him for long, but could not catch up. 
Ultimately the Lord entered a cave. Kalyavan too followed Him into the cave. 
In the cave the Lord saw that someone was sleeping there. So He covered the 
man with his yellow length of cloth and himself hid inside the cave. Kalyavan 
too arrived there and saw the sleeping man. He mistook him for God and said: 
"Krishna, you might have thought that braves do not attack on sleeping 
people. So I will first wake you up and then kill you." Saying thus Kalyavan 
kicked the sleeping man hard. However, as soon as the man awakened and 
glanced at Kalyavan, Kalyavan got incinerated at once. 
TALE OF MUCHKUND  
Parikshit asked: "Gurudev, who was that sleeping man?"  
Shukdev says: "O king, that sleeping man was Muchkund, the son of the king 
Mandhata. The Gods had sought his assistance in their war against the demon 
during the Satya Yuga. With Muchkund's help,the Gods had defeated the 
demons and thus pleased had asked him to seek a boon. Muchkund then had 
sought a boon of seeing God in tangible form. The Gods had assured him that 
he would have a sight of God in Dwapar Yuga. Since Dwapar Yuga was still far 
away, so Muchkund had asked: "What should I do till then?" The Gods asked 
him to sleep somewhere and blessed him with a boon that whoever waked 
him up would be incinerated at once, by his glance. Thus, in order to get 

927 
 



Kalyavan incinerated and show Muchkund with his Divine form, Lord had gone 
to that spot where Muchkund was sleeping. 
Muchkund got the sight of God in Chaturbhuj form; and seeked a boon of 
continuous devotion for three births. Thus, Lord defeated Malechchh army 
and captured all their wealth. He also defeated Jarasandha and caused great 
joy for the people of Dwaraka. 
The king of Anart, Raiwat got his daughter Rewati married to Balarama with 
the blessing of Brahma. 
MESSAGE OF RUKMANI FOR LORD KRISHNA  
Shukdev said: "O Parikshit, Bhismak was the king of Vidarbh. He had five sons 
and a daughter Rukmani. Rukmi, the eldest son of Bhismak, had fixed his 
sister's engagement with Shishupal, the prince of Chaidi. Narada did not like 
this development. He went to Kundanpur, the capital of Vidarbh and said in 
the court of Bhismak: O King, I am coming from Dwaraka." Bhismak said! "O 
great Sage, I have never heard about any city named Dwaraka". Thus, in the 
court of Bhismak, Narada narrated about the life of Lord Krishna and the 
grandeur of Dwaraka. Bhismak heard the tale with full attention. His daughter 
Rukmani too enjoyed the tale. 
But Rukmi had a strong opposition against Lord Krishna. Ignoring the wish of 
his father, he was not ready to get his sister married to Lord Krishna. On the 
appointed day, Shishupal appeared there, in a procession, to get married with 
Rukmani. 
But Rukmani was determined to marry Lord Krishna. She sent a love letter to 
Krishna through a loyal Brahmin and declared a fast unto death. Lord Krishna 
read her letter, which said: "O Trilokkinath, since the moment, these ears have 
heard about your virtues, actions, character and plays, my soul experiences 
divine peace. O Achyut, my mind is dedicated in your feet. O great among the 
men, this Rukmani has dedicated herself in your feet. Now it is upto you to 
see that no jackal could take away the lion's share." The Brahmin, the carrier 
of the letter, returned to Kundanpur with an assurance from the Lord. Lord 

928 
 



too called the charioteer and set out at once for Kundanpur. There in 
Kundanpur, Rukmani after getting the assurance from the Brahmin, was thus 
waiting for Lord's arrival. 
Preparations for Rukmani's marriage with Shisupal were on with full swing in 
Kundanpur. All the houses, streets and lanes were cleaned and sprinkled with 
scented water. All the men and women folk donned new clothes and 
ornaments. King Bhismak worshipped his ancestors and Gods and welcomed 
the Brahmins liberally. Extremely beautiful princess Rukmani was given 
ceremonial bath and donned with auspicious clothes and bracelets. 
The king of Chedi, Damaghosh got the auspicious rites for the marriage of his 
son Shishupal, performed by Brahmins. All the Baratis (people in marriage 
procession) were given grand reception. Many great kings like Shalv, 
Jarasandh, Dantvaktra, Vidurath and Paundruk were present in the marriage 
procession. They had come with their armies with an intention of fighting 
Krishna and Balarama. After Krishna's departure, Balarama too set out for 
Kundanpur with chaturangini (with four wings) army, for he had known about 
their opponents' preparedness. 
Rukmani was eagerly awaiting Lord's arrival. She had received the news that 
Dwarakanath (Krishna) had resolved to take her away. She was feeling 
overwhelmed in her heart. 
Seeing Lord Krishna arrived intently in the marriage ceremonies of his 
daughter, king Bhismak welcomed him. Seeing him, even the common people 
of Vidarbh prayed "May our princess Rukmani get Sri Krishna as her husband. 
At the same time, Rukmani emerged from her palace to go to the temple of 
Ambikadevi, soldiers were guarding her. In the temple, Rukmani prayed 
peacefully: "O Mother Ambika I greet you and Ganapati, who is sitting in your 
lap. I seek your blessing that may my wish be fulfilled and may I receive Sri 
Krishna as my husband." On her way back, Rukmani was walking very slowly 
for she was awaiting Lord's arrival, which was due in any moment. Just then, 
Lord Krishna appeared before her. Before she could ride her chariot Lord lifted 

929 
 



her from amidst the crowd. And in the presence of hundrerds of kings, Krishna 
and Balarama eloped away with Rukmani.  
KRISHNA DEFEATS RUKMI AND MARRIES RUKMANI  
Hearing the news that Krishna has eloped with Rukmani, Rukmi and all other 
kings present there boiled with anger. Accompanied by their huge armies, 
they decided to give them a chase. Thus chased my them, Yadnvanishis 
stopped and encountered the kings boldly. With a true ambition to win, brave 
Yadav soldiers defeated the enemeies. All the kings like Jarasandh fled for 
their lives. Rukmi had resolved that without getting Rukmani released from 
Krishna's captivity, he would not show his face in Kundanpur. He chased Lord 
Krishna for long. But Dwarakanath defeated him and got his head shaved. 
Thus defeating all the kings, Lord Krishna brought Rukmani to Dwaraka. There 
they got married formally. All the people of Dwaraka celebrated festivities for 
many days. People presented them with lot of precious gifts. All the people 
were in great joy to see Lakshmi as Rukmani with her husband Lord Krishna. 
BIRTH OF PRADYUMN, KILLING OF SHABARASUR  
Shukdev says: O Parikshit, Kamadev was a part of Lord himself. After getting 
incinerated by Rudra, Kamadev took refuge in the supreme Lord to get an 
incarnation once more. Thus, Kamadev was born as Rukmani,s first son 
Pradyumn. 
But just after his birth, Pradyumn was kidnapped by a demon Shambarasur. 
The demon dropped the baby into the sea, where a huge fish swallowed him 
in whole. Coincidently the fish was caught by the fishers and presented to the 
kitchen of Shambarasur. When the cooks cut the fish open, an extremely 
beautiful baby emerged. Mayawati, the governess of the kitchen, felt 
overjoyed to see the baby. She began to rear the baby with love and affection. 
Once Narada arrived in the kitchen and said: "Mayawati, do you know who is 
in your lap? “  
“No, O DevaRishi, I found him from the belly of a fish" said Mayawati. 
DevaRishi Narada said: "He is your husband Kamadev and you are his wife 

930 
 



Rati. In this birth, he has appeared as Pradyumn the son of Krishna. Hearing 
this, Mayawati saluted Narada with respect. Since then she regarded 
Pradyumn as her husband and served him accordingly. When Pradyumn 
matured. Mayawati reminded him about his real appearance. Pradyumn, 
thereafter, killed Shambarasur and got married with Mayawati. Then the 
couple arrived in Dwaraka. 
TALE OF SYAMANTAK THE GEM AND ITS THEFT  
A person named Satrajit was a great devotee of Lord Suryanarayana. Pleased 
by his devotion, Suryadev presented him a gem called Syamantak. The gem 
had a radiance equal to the sun. 
Bearing that gem, Satrajit arrived in Lord's court. By the radiance of his gem, 
all the people and the courtiers mistook him for Suryadeva and stood in his 
regard. But the Lord recognised him and asked his coutiers to be calm. Then to 
Satrajit, Lord Said: "Satrajit, your gem is really very beautiful. Nana (maternal 
grandfather) Ugrasen is the king of this region. If you present this gem to him, 
it will be very good. But Satrajit refused to present that gem.One day, later on, 
Satrajits brother Prasenjit went hunting, wearing the gem in his neck. In the 
forest a lion killed him and snatched the gem. The lion was in turn killed by the 
Ursine king Jambvan. Jambvan took the gem to his cave and gave it to his 
children to play with. When Prasenjit did not return from hunting, Satrajit felt 
sorry and accused Krishna that He had killed his brother for the gem. 
When Lord Krishna heard that he was being blamed for the mishap, He 
himself went to the forests. There he found the dead body of Prasenjit, but 
there was no sign of gem around the cadaver. He found only footprints of a 
lion leaving from there. Following the footprints, He discovered the dead lion 
and the foot prints of a great bear. Following the footprints, He reached in the 
cave where Jambvan's daughter Jambvati was playing with the gem. 
As soon as Lord Krishna proceeded to take the gem, Jambvan arrived. A fierce 
duel resulted between them. They continued to fight for twenty-six days 

931 
 



without truce. On the twenty-seventh day Jambvan requested Lord! "Please 
wait O Lord." Lord said: "Do you want to take rest?”  
“No", said Jambvan, "I have recognised you. You are non other than Lord 
Narayana Himself. 
Nobody else has the power to defeat me." Lord appeared before Jambvan as 
Sri Rama. Jambvan prayed and worshipped Him. He was feeling guilty that he 
dared to fight Lord. Lord said that He had arrived there for the gem only. 
Jambvan gave him the gem and also his daughter Jambvati. 
Lord returned the gem to Satrajit and married Jambvati formally. 
Lord summoned Satrajit to his court and in the presence of the king Ugrasen, 
related the sequence of incidents that took place in the jungle. Satrajit felt 
ashamed. With a feeling of repentance he took the gem. He was getting afraid 
also that he made enemity with Lord Krishna without reason. Hence to 
expiate his crime, Satrajit thought of presenting the gem Syamantak and his 
daughter Satyabhama to Lord Krishna. Lord Krishna accepted Satybhama as 
his wife but returned the gem to Satrajit saying: "It is a gift of Lord Suryadev. 
Keep it with you. You are required to deposit the gold that you get from it, in 
the royal treasure." Akrura and Kritvarma were not pleased with the marriage 
of Satyabhama. So they got Satrajit killed by Shatdanva. Shatdanva killed 
Satrajit in his sleep and absconded with the gem. Lord Krishna was then away 
in Hastinapur. Satyabhama too reached there and informed Krishna about her 
father's assassination. With Balarama, Lord Krishna chased Shatdhanva. But 
even after killing him, they could not trace the gem. Shatdhanva had given the 
gem to Akrura to keep till his return. But after the death of Shatdhanva, 
frightened Akrura came to stay in Kashi. From the effect of the gem Akrura 
performed many grand Yagyas there. Lord summoned Akrura from Kashi. 
After welcoming and treating him in the court, Lord asked him about the gem. 
Akrura showed the gem in the court. But Lord returned the gem to Akrura. 
KRISHNA'S OTHER MARRIAGES 1.) Once Lord Krishna visited Indraprasth to 
see Pandavas there. There riding a chariot with Arjuna, He came to the 

932 
 



forests. On the bank of river Yamuna a pretty woman was observing penance. 
By the instinct of God, Arjuna drew near her and asked for her identity. She 
said: "I am Kalindi, the daughter of Suryadev. I am penancing here in order to 
get married with Lord Krishna." Lord got Kalindi boarded on the chariot and 
got married to her formally.2.) Mitrvinda was the sister of Vind Anuvind the 
king of Ujjain. She had a desire to get Lord as her husband. But her brother, 
Vind Anuvind was a follower of Duryodhan. So he stopped his sister Mitrvinda 
from getting married to Krishna. But Krishna eloped with Mitrvinda from the 
his court and got married to her formally later on. 
3.) Satya was the daughter of Nagnjit, the king of Kaushal. She was extremely 
beautiful lady. 
The king had resolved that he would marry his daughter only to him who 
would defeat his seven most formidable oxen. Many princes has tried their 
luck since then but failed. When Lord Krishna heard about that, He reached 
Kaushal with his army. The king of Kaushal welcomed and treated him well, 
and told him about his resolution. Lord then took seven guises and in no time 
defeated his seven formidable oxen. Gladly the king married his daughter 
Satya to Lord Krishna. 
4.) Shukdev said: "Parikshit, Lord's aunt (father's sister) Shrutkirti was married 
in the kingdom of Kaikauja. Bhadra was the daughter of Shrutkirti. Bhadra's 
brothers like Santardan etc. themselves had got their sister married to Lord 
Krishna. 
5.) Lakshmana was the daughter of the king of Madra. She was very beautiful 
and meritorius. 
Lord abducted her all alone from the Swayamvar organised for her marriage. 
Later, Lord married to her formally. 
SALVATION OF BHAUMASUR  
Shukdev said: Parikshit, Prayjyotishpur was the capital of the demon 
Bhaumasur. He was very strong and powerful. He had snatched the canopy of 
Varuna, ear-rings of Aditi the mother of the Gods, and Maniparvat of the Gods 

933 
 



on Meru. Apart from these, he had also captured sixteen thousand and one 
hundred princesses as well. 
Devraj Indra himself visited Dwaraka and prayed Lord to get them rid of 
Bhaumasur's atrocities. 
With the dear wife Satyabhama and riding his vehicle Garuda. Lord Krishna 
arrived in the capital of Bhaumasur. But to enter Pragjyotishpur was a 
impossible task. But with the blows of his mace and arrows, Lord easily broke 
the hills, destroyed strategic positions and cut the snares with sword. By his 
wheel he destroyed the walls of fire, water and air. With the loud sound of 
conch, Lord renderered the machines, installed there, useless. 
Ultimately, God destroyed the rampart of the citadel. Disturbed by the noise, 
the five-headed demon Mur ran with a trident to kill God. But with a single 
shot of his arrow, Lord broke his trident and cut his head with his wheel. 
Soldiers and commanders of Bhaumasur were also killed. 
Bhaumasur then came himself to fight. He had donned a shinning crown and 
was wearing big earrings. With his wheel, Lord cut the demon's head. As soon 
as He beheaded the demon, the Gods showered flowers on the Lord and 
worshipped Him. Even the mother earth came and put a garland of five 
colours around lords neck. She also presented to him the earrings of Aditi, 
canopy of Varuna, and a great gem. At the request of earth, Lord assured 
Bhaumasur's son Bhagdatt freedom from his fears. 
After slaying Bhaumasur, Lord entered his palace. There he released the 
sixteen-thousand onehundred captive princesses. The princesses were very 
much impressed by the Lord. They had all accepted in their mind, Lord Krishna 
as their husband. Lord too bowed before their love and accepted them as his 
wives and arranged to send them to Dwaraka. 
Shukdev says: Parikshit, Rukmvati was the daughter of Rukmi, the brother of 
Rukmani. When a Swayamvar was organised for her, she saw Pradyumn. She 
was so impressed by him that she chose him as her husband. But it was not 
acceptable to other princes. They tried to stop their marriage. But defeating 

934 
 



them all, Pradyumn abducted Rukmvati and married her formally. Then to 
please his sister Rukmani, Rukmi got his grand-daughter Rochana married to 
Rukmani's grandsons Anirudh. 
The son of the demon king Bali, Banasur was a great devotee of Lord Lord 
Shiva. Banasur ruled over the kingdom Shonitpur. By the grace of Lord Lord 
Shiva, he had received thousand arms. 
Even all the Gods including Indra used to serve him. Thus blinded by his 
physical strength, Banasur sought a boon from Lord to meet a match for his 
strength. Lord Shiva said: "O fool, your thirst for war shall be quenched when 
your flag is broken." Banasur had a daughter named Usha.  
Once she had a dream in which Anirudh was making love with her. She was 
very much perplexed by the dream. After a few days with the help of her 
friend Chitralekha, Anirudh sneaked into her palace. He stay there and 
enjoyed the company of Usha for long. But Anirudh's clandestine stay could 
not remain hidden from the eyes of Banasura. So he put Anirudh in prison. 
There in Dwaraka, everyone was worried by Anirudh's long absence. 
It was Narada, who ultimately revealed the fact that Anirudh was in the prison 
of Banasur. 
Hearing the news, Lord Krishna launched an attack on Banasur. His armies 
surrounded Shonitpur. During Ghurabandi the flag of Banasur's palace fell. 
Lord Shanker arrived to assist Banasur. Lord Krishna cut all the arms of 
Banasur. At the request of Lord Shiva, he left only four of his arms intact. 
Banasur bowed his head before Lord Krishna and brought Anirudh and Usha 
respectfully before Him. With them Lord Krishna returned to Dwaraka where 
formal marriage of Usha and Anirudh took place. 
TALE OF THE KING NRIG  
Once, Lord Krishna's sons visited the forests. There they saw a huge 
Chameleon fallen in a large, deep well. They tried to pull it out but in vain. The 
princes, therefore, returned to the palace and related this strange episode to 

935 
 



Lord Krishna. Lord too came to the well and with His left hand, easily pulled 
the Chamelon out. 
As soon as the chameleon came out, it turned into a divine God and began to 
worship God. He said: "O Lord, I am Nrig. The king Ikshvaku was my father. In 
my life, I had donated uncountable numbers of cows to the Brahmins. But 
once a cow, donated by me, returned to my cowshed. By mistake I made a 
resolution to donate it to another Brahmin. My action led to a dispute 
between the two Brahmins, and my wisdom failed to settle their dispute. Both 
the Brahmins went away unsatisfied, but I met this fate after death. Since 
then, I had been in this well in the form of a chameleon. Now, by the graceful 
touch of your hands, O Lord, I have received salvation." King Nrig then went 
around the Lord and returned to his heavenly abode. 
SALVATION OF PAUNDRAK  
Once Balarama and Krishna had gone to Braj to see Nandbaba there. 
Meanwhile the king Paundrak of Karush sent an envoy to Lord Krishna with a 
message that said: 'I am Lord Vasudev.' Pandrak's envoy arrived in the court 
and read out the message: "To bestow my grace on the people, I have taken 
an incarnation. You have falsely named yourself as Vasudev and bore my 
insignia. Take my refuge or face the battle." Shukdev said: Parikshit, hearing 
the message of Paundrak, Ugrasen and other courtiers began to laugh. Lord 
asked the envoy to inform Paundrak that He would launch His wheel on him 
and his army. 
Receiving the message Paundrak launched an attack on Dwaraka with two 
Akshauhini army. The king of Kashi was a friend of Paundrak. He too came to 
his assistance with three Akshauhini armies. Paundrak had disguised as 
Vasudev and was bearing artifical conch, wheel, mace and lotus and. He had 
also adorned Swastik, Kaustubh etc. All the people began to laugh at 
Paundrak's clown like attire. 

936 
 



In no time, the Lord stripped him of all his adornments. His wheel cut his 
head. Then with an arrow the Lord cut the head of the king of Kashi. His head 
fell in front of his palace's gate. 
SuDakshain, the son of the Kashi king, organised a grand Yagya to avenge his 
father's killing. 
An ogress, Kritya emerged from the Yagya and began to burn Dwaraka. All the 
people prayed Krishna to protect them. Lord assured them to be fearless and 
ordered His wheel Sudarshan to kill Kritya. Sudarshan extinguished the fire, 
killed Kritya and destroyed Kashi. Then it returned to the Lord's finger. 
SALVATION OF DWIVID  
The king Parikshit expressed his desire to hear about the life of Balarama. 
Shukdev said:, "O king, there was once a monkey named Dwivid. He was the 
friend of Bhaumasur. When Dwivid heard about Bhaumasur's killing by Sri 
Krishna, he began to cause large scale destruction in the kingdom. His 
disruptive activities in the country began to terrorize the subjects of Lord 
Krishna. 
Once hearing sweet music, the monkey was drawn towards the Raivtak 
mountain. There he saw Balarama amidst beautiful young women. The 
monkey began to behave indecently. Angered by his indecency, Balarama hit 
him with his pestel, named Sunand, and killed the monkey. 
MARRIAGE OF SAMB  
Samb was the son of Lord Krishna and born to Jambvati. He had kidnapped 
Lakshmana, the daughter of Duryodhana from her Swayamvar. Infuriated 
Kauravas chased them and, with difficulty, they caught Samb and tied him. 
When the Yaduvanshis got the news, they began preparations to launch an 
attack on Kauravas. Balarama pacified them and reached Hastinapur alone. 
There he received a warm welcome from the Kauravas. Balarama said to 
them: "It is an order of the king Ugrasen that you should see Samb off with his 
newly wedded wife." Hearing Balarama's words Kauravas got angry and began 
to deride Yaduvanshis. Infuriated by Kauravas derisions, Balarama trained his 

937 
 



pestle and plough. He intended to turn over the town of Hastinapur into the 
river Yamuna. When the city began to shake, Kauravas felt perplexed and 
begged Balarama for his pardon. Balarama assured them to be fearless and 
returned to Dwaraka with Samb and his newly wedded wife Lakshmana. 
THE KINGS IN CAPTIVITY SEEK LORD'S HELP  
Shukdev says: "Parikshit, once Lord Krishna was holding His court when an 
emissary arrived in the court. The kings who were held captive forcibly by 
Jarasandh had sent him. The emissary related the miseries of those kings to 
Lord Krishna. Through the emissary, the kings had requested: "O Lord of the 
world, Kindly get us free from our miseries. We are in your refuge. 
We desire your sight. Kindly bestow us with your grace." Lord Krishna sent the 
emissary off with assurance of timely action. 
Meanwhile, DevaRishi Narada arrived in the court and informed the Lord of 
Yudhisthira's intention to organise a grand Rajsuy Yagya and his cordial 
invitation for the Lord to attend the ceremony. Lord asked his friend Uddhava 
for an advice as to where He ought to go first - to Indraprastha in Rajsuy Yagya 
or to liberate the king from the captivity of Jarasandh. Uddhava advised Lord 
to go to Indraprastha first. There He would be able to serve both the 
purposes. 
Uddhava's advise was in the interest of all. Everyone supported it. Taking 
permission from His priest and teachers, Lord set out on a chariot with the 
whole family to reach Indraprastha. In Indraprastha, Pandavas accorded the 
Lord with warm-hearted felicitations. By the dictate of Lord, Mayasur built a 
divine looking court for Yudhisthira. The courtroom was a marvellous piece of 
architecture. The shinning, smooth, floor of it appeared like water, while 
water bodies presented a look like marble floors. 
KILLING OF JARASANDH  
During Yudhisthira's Rajsuy Yagya, all the Pandavas set out in all the directions 
to conquer the kings and expand the boundaries of their kingdom. Warriors 
like Bheem, Arjuna defeated great kings all around and extended the 

938 
 



boundaries of Yudhisthira's empire. But to defeat Jarasandh, - Bhima, Arjuna 
and Lord Krishna went in the guise Brahmins. They reached Jarasandh capital 
Girivraj and prayed him for donations. Jarasandh promised to give them the 
things of their desires. Lord Krishna then introduced themselves and begged 
Jarasandh for a duel with any of them. Jarasandh accepted to fight a duel with 
Bhima. He gave Bhima a mace and both of them came out to the outskirts of 
the town, where they began their duel. Both of them were equally strong and 
equally brave and well pitted. 
Twenty-seven days passed, but their duel remained inconclusive. On the 
twenty-eighth day, during the fight, Lord signaled Bhima a way to kill 
Jarasandh. He took a small twig in his hands and tore it apart into two. Bhima 
understood the signal and beating Jarasandh on ground, he tore him apart in 
two pieces and threw them in opposite directions. Thus came the end of evil 
Jarasandh. Lord Krishna and Arjuna heartily greeted Bhima for his success. 
They then enthroned Jarasandh's son Sahdev and also got the captive kings 
released. 
SALVATION OF SHISHUPAL  
King Yudhisthira had invited great vedic Brahmins and Acharayas on the 
occasion. Those great Sages included Ved Vyasa, Bhardwaj, Sumantu, Gautam, 
Asit, Vashishtha, Chyvan, Kanv, Maitreya, Kavash, Chit, Vishvamitra, Vamdev, 
Sumati, Jemini, Kratu, Pail, Parashurama, Shukracharya, Asuri, Vitihotra, 
Madhuchchanda, Veersen and Akritvarn etc. Persons from Kauravas side like 
Drona, Bhisma, Kripacharya, Dhritrashtra, Vidhur and Duryodhan etc. were 
too invited to witness the celebrations. Even Brahma, Shiv, Indra, Gandharvas, 
Vidyadhars had too arrived. But before the Yagya could start a dispute 
cropped up among the great sages as to who ought to be worshipped first in 
the Yagya. 
In the opinion of Sahdeva (youngest of the Pandava brothers, not the son of 
Jarasandh), Lord Krishna deserved the first worship. Every one supported him. 
Only Shishupal could not tolerate the decision. He stood up and said: "In the 
presence of such great ascetics, savants, polymaths and sages, how can this 

939 
 



cowherd deserve the first worship." Despite Shishupal bitter remarks Lord 
Krishna kept quiet. But Shishupal did not. Encouraged by Lord's silence he 
began to attack the kings, who stood by Lord's side, with sword. He was 
simultaneously abusing Lord Krishna also. Lord had assured Shishupal of this 
forgiveness for up to one hundred sins. But now Shishupal's sins have crossed 
that permitted number. So, quieting all, Lord cut his head with His wheel. As 
soon as the dead body of Shishupal fell on the ground, a flame emerged from 
it and merged with Lord Krishna.  
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, feelings of hostility had been accumulating in the 
heart of Shishupal for his past three births against Lord Krishna. It was 
because of these intense hostile feelings that Shishupal met salvation 
eventually. 
After the salvation of Shishupal, ceremonies and rituals of Yagya proceeded 
unabated. At the end king Yudhisthira presented all those present there with 
fitting gifts and took ceremonial bath. 
At the request of Pandavas, Lord Krishna stayed in Indraprastha for many 
months. 
SALVATION OF SHALV  
Shukdev says: "Parikshit, now listen to the tale of how Lord caused salvation 
for Shalv. Shalv was the childhood friend of Shishupal and had attended the 
marriage of Rukmani as a member of Shishupal's wedding party. At that time, 
Yaduvanshis had defeated them all including Jarasandh and Shalv. Right at 
that moment, Shalv had resolved to destroy Yaduvanshis and began 
worshipping Gods of the Gods Pashupati (Shiva). Lord Ashutosh Lord Shiva 
was pleased with him. As a boon, Shalv had got an aeroplane that was 
invincible even for the Gods, demons, humans, nagas, etc and was particularly 
formidable for Yaduvanshis. By the dictate of Lord Lord Shiva, the demon 
Maya constructed such an aeroplane of iron. The aeroplane named Saubh was 
as big as a city and was difficult to be spotted or caught. It could move as fast 
as one's wishes. 

940 
 



Soon after getting the aeroplane, Shalv launched an attack of 
Dwaraka.Surrounding Dwaraka, Shalv began to destroy buildings and houses 
there. Seeing the people terrorized, Pradyumn consoled them to be fearless 
and himself set out on a chariot to counter Shalv. He pierced Shalv with 
arrows. But Shalv's minister Dyumana attacked Pradyumn with a mace. By the 
blow of the mace, Pradyumn lost his consciousness. But soon he came around 
and began to slay Shalv's forces. The fierce battle continued for twenty-seven 
days. Lord was away then in Indraprastha Yagya. But He was sure that in his 
absence Kshatriya kings of Shishupal side would be attacking on Dwaraka. 
Lord reached Dwaraka and saw a fierce battle between Pradyumn and Shalv. 
Seeing Lord arrive, Shalv began to attack Him with sharp arrows. Lord hit Shalv 
with a powerful blow of mace and he began to spit blood from his mouth. He 
then tried to show many illusions and showered Lord with weapons. But Lord 
wounded Shalv with his arrows, broke his aeroplane with his mace. 
Very soon thereafter the aeroplane plunged in to the sea. Shalv then attacked 
Lord with mace but Lord cut his head with Sudarshan wheel. Seeing his end, 
all the Gods showered flowers on Lord. 
SALVATION OF DANTVAKTRA AND VIDURATH  
After the killing of Shishupal, Shalv etc. Dantvaktra arrived in the battlefield 
carrying a mace. 
When Lord saw him coming, He too jumped down from the chariot and 
baulked his movement with a mace. Dantvaktra tried to humiliate God with 
his abuses and hit him on head with his mace. Lord easily bore the blow of 
mace and hit Dantvaktra's chest with his mace named Kaumodaki. 
Dantvaktra's heart tore apart by the blow and he fell dead. 
Vidurath was the brother of Dantvaktra. He came in the field with sword and 
shield to avenge his brother's death. Seeing him ready to launch an attack, 
Lord cut Vidurath's head with his wheel. 

941 
 



Thus, Lord Krishna entered Dwaraka only after killing Shalv, Dantvaktra and 
Vidurath. All the Gods and other inhabitants of heaven showered flowers on 
Him. 
SUDAMA: THE LORD'S FRIEND  
During his stay as a disciple at the hermitage of sage Sandipani, Lord Krishna 
had a Brahmin friend named Sudama. He was very indifferent in nature with 
no desires for the material things. 
After their education, Lord Krishna came to Dwaraka while Sudama, who had 
no any inclination for accumulating material wealth, got married and began to 
pass his life with his wife Susheela abject poverty. 
One day his wife Susheela said: "O lord, your friend Krishna is the king of 
Dwaraka. He is very benevolent to Brahmins and his devotees. If you go to see 
him, he will understand your miseries and grant you a lot of wealth." But 
Sudama plainly refused saying: "Devi, I have chosen the path of devotion for 
self upliftment and not for the wealth." Susheela, however, kept of insisting: 
"All right, don't go for the wealth. But at least you can go to see your old 
friend. Sudama accepted this proposition, thinking that only the sight of Lord 
yields supreme benefit to the devotee. But he wanted something as a gift to 
present to his old friend. At this, his wife tied four handfuls of raw rice in a 
bundle.With that humble gift, Sudama set out for Dwaraka. His poverty was at 
its helm. But he kept on reciting Lord's name all along the way. After walking 
for some distance, Sudama felt thirsty. He drank water, quenched his thirst 
and thanked God that He at least does give water to drink. 
Sudama kept on walking the whole day. In the evening, he kept the bundle of 
rice under his head as a pillow and slept. 
Now it was God's turn to show His gratitude for the devotee. When Sudama 
awoke in the morning, he found himself right in front of Lord Krishna's palace. 
At first he could not believe his eyes; but the people told him that he was in 
Dwaraka and standing right before the lord's palace. Sudama requested the 
gatekeeper to inform Lord Krishna that his childhood friend Sudama had 

942 
 



come. Lord Krishna was sitting in the company of Rukmani when the 
gatekeeper delivered the message. As soon as Lord Krishna learned about 
Sudama's arrival, He stood up and ran helter-skelter to welcome his childhood 
friend. At the gate He cordially embraced Sudama and escorted him into his 
private chamber and made him sit on the throne. 
Krishna and queen Rukmani both washed Sudama's feet one by one. By the 
mere touch of his friend, Krishna was feeling overjoyed. His eyes filled with 
tears. He and Sudama were holding each other's hands. Their hearts were 
beating with the memories of their period as disciples at the hermitage of 
Sandipani. For long, none of them could uttered a word. At last Sudama said: 
"O Jagadguru Krishna, I have the fortune of being your friend. What remains 
for me to do?" Lord Krishna said: "Brother, have you brought for me 
something sent by my sister-in-law? I love to accept even the pettiest thing 
presented with affection."  
Shukdev says: 'O Parikshit, at the Lord's words, Sudama felt ashamed and he 
did not reveal the four handfuls of raw rice that he had brought as gift. With 
shame, Sudama began to look at the ground. Lord knew everything that his 
dear friend Sudama had never remembered him with a desire for wealth. This 
time too he has come at the insistence of his wife. 
'Hence, I will give him the wealth that is rare even for the Gods...' thought 
Lord Krishna and snatched the bundle of raw rice and opened it with great 
respect. He put one handful of it in his mouth. When Lord proceeded to take 
next handful, queen Rukmani held his hand and prayed: "O Vishvambhar 
(fosterer of the world) for the prosperity of entire world this one handful is 
sufficient." Sudama stayed that night in the palace of Sri Krishna. There he 
experienced the comfort of Vaikunth (abode of God). Staying there for many 
days, Sudama at last, took leave of Sri Krishna and set out for his home. Lord 
did not give Sudama anything apparently nor did Sudama asked for His favour. 
He was travelling overwhelmed by a divine sense of devotion and felt that 
Krishna might have not given him wealth lest he should forget Him. 

943 
 



Thus, sunk in myriad kinds of thoughts, Sudama reached his home. But at the 
place, where his dilapidated hut stood once there was now a divine palace 
surrounded by verdant gardens. The floors of the palace were embedded with 
precious gems and stones. Standing at the gate, Sudama felt confused, when 
his wife Susheela came out with scented water to welcome him. Tears were 
rolling on her cheeks. With love she greeted Sudama and escorted him inside 
the palace. Sudama was still reflecting over the God's grace and praying: "May 
I have the friendship of Lord in every birth, may my affection increase for 
Lord's feet. I don't want wealth.' Since then, Sudama enjoyed the comforts of 
the palace as the bounty of Lord bestowed upon him by non other than the 
Lord Krishna himself. His devotion increased day by day. 
MEETING OF LORD WITH GOPAS-GOPIS  
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, Lord Krishna was passing his time with pleasure in 
Dwaraka. A total solar eclipse happened to fall during that period. People 
from all over India thronged in Kurukshetra to take a dip in sacred Ganges on 
that great occasion. All the Yaduvanshis too arrived there. When Vrajvasis 
(Inhabitants of Vraj) learned about Krishna and Balarama's arrival in 
Kurukshetra, they too assembled there. 
During the festival, Lord Krishna met His foster-father Nand and other 
cowherds who were his childhood friends. Lord Krishna met the Gopis also 
who had been pining for his sight since long. 
They enjoyed the meeting and kept on chatting for long. Overwhelmed by 
love and joy, Vasudev embraced Nand. Lord Krishna and Balarama respectfully 
greeted mother Yashoda and father Nand. They too embraced Krishna and 
Balarama cordially. 
Gopis were specially overwhelmed by Lord's sight. They had no other desire 
but to have a sight of Lord. That day their long cherished dream had come 
true. Gopis imbued the captivating appearance of Lord and experienced the 
joy of embracing Him. Lord met all the Gopis and embraced them. Inquired 
about their well being and preached them with spiritual knowledge. By the 

944 
 



virtue of that knowledge, feeling of living disappeared among the Gopis and 
they merged with God forever. 
ORGANISATION OF YAGYA BY VASUDEV  
DevaRishi Narada, Vyasa and many other great sages arrived in Kurukshetra to 
have a sight of Lord. Lord welcomed them all. Then Vasudev greeted them and 
enquired about way for his self up liftment. Laughingly, Narada said: 
"Vasudev, a person, already living at the bank of the Ganges, discards her holy 
water and goes to other places of pilgrimage for his purification. 
In the presence of Krishna and Balarama, the sages said: "You regard the 
indescrible, eternal, Sachchidanand Sri Krishna as your son, and seek the way 
of your self upliftment from us. O Vasudev, recognise Him. Take to His refuge, 
only He can save you." Vasudev got the meaning of sage's words and began to 
develop feelings of devotion for his son. Every human being has obligation for 
the Gods, sages and his ancestors. The sages got a Yagya performed in 
Kurukshetra by Vasudev to free him from the obligation for Gods. 
REVISTING OF DEVAKI'S SIX SONS 
In Dwaraka, Krishna and Balarama used to greet their parent's first daily in the 
morning. Now Vasudev had recognised His identity. So after their return from 
Kurukshetra, when Krishna and Balarama went as usual to greet their parents, 
Vasudev greeted them first. Lord Krishna then preached his father about the 
metaphysical knowledge. With that knowledge, Vasudev began to see Krishna 
everywhere. 
Mother Devaki was also present there. Memory of her six children, who were 
killed by Kansa, was still afresh in her mind. She had heard that Krishna had 
fetched the dead son of Sandipani from Yamloka. So she prayed to them " You 
both are venerable even to the Gods. Kindly grant me my desire. Show me my 
six sons who were killed by Kansa. By their mother's dictate and helped by 
Yogmaya, both the brothers reached Sutal Loka. 
The demon king Bali welcomed them there and offered them a seat, and 
washed their feet. King Bali then asked God what could he do for Him. Lord 

945 
 



said: O demon king, in Swayambhuv Manvantara, six sons were born to Urna 
the wife of Prajapati Marichi. They were all Gods. They had once seen Brahma 
trying to copulate with his own daughter and hence derided at him. 
Indignant Brahma had then curse them to take birth in demon incarnation. 
They therefore were born as the sons of Hiranykashipu. 
In the present era, Yogmaya had made them born as Devaki's sons who were 
killed by Kansa. 
They are all now in your Loka. Mother Devaki is mourning for them, so we 
shall take them with us. They will thus be freed from the curse and go to their 
heavenly abode." Thus Lord Krishna and Balarama brought those six babies to 
Dwaraka and handed them to mother Devaki. Seeing her babies again, 
Devaki's heart filled with love for her sons. Milk began to flood her breast. She 
breast-fed them. Drinking the milk, all the babies received salvation. They 
then departed to their heavenly abode. 
LOVE AND MARRIAGE OF SUBHADRA AND ARJUNA  
King Parikshit asked: "Gurudev, how did my grandfather Arjuna and 
grandmother Subhadra got married? I want to hear this tale. Kindly narrate it 
to me." Shukdev said: Parikshit once travelling on a pilgrimage tour, Arjuna 
reached in Prabhas region. 
There he learned that Balarama was desirous of marrying his sister Subhadra 
to Duryodhan. But Vasudev and Krishna were not in the favour of this 
marriage. So, a strong urge took hold in his mind to get Subhadra as his wife. 
Acting as per the urge, Arjuna reached Dwaraka in the guise of Vaishnava 
sage. It was rainy season then, so with an excuse of Chaturmasya Vrat (four 
months long fast), Arjuna stayed in Dwaraka. During his stay, Balarama served 
and looked after him very well. But neither Balarama nor any other inmates of 
the palace could recognise Arjuna. 
Once Balarama invited Arjuna to his home. There he offered good, delicious 
food to Arjuna. 

946 
 



Subhadra too served him well. There, they fell in love with each other. Later 
on, boarding a chariot, Subhadra went out of the palace for a joy ride. At the 
outskirts of the town, Arjuna was awaiting for her. He had already taken 
permission of Devaki, Vasudev and Krishna. Subhadra too had silently nodded 
her acceptance. 
So that evening Arjuna and Subhadra eloped from Dwaraka. The news of 
Subhadra eolping with Arjuna first outraged Balarama. But Lord Krishna and 
other near and dear ones convinced and pacified him.PRAYERS OF VEDAS King 
Parikshit asked: "Brahmin, Brahma is beyond the limit of do's and why's. He is 
free from the virtues like Sat, Raja and Tama. He cannot be seen by mind. On 
the other hand Guna (Virtues) is the subject of all the Shrutis (Vedas). How do 
Vedas then depict Brahma?"  
Shukdev says: "Parikshit, Lord is omnipotent and a treasure of all the virtues. 
Shrutis (Vedas) do depict Saguna (with virtues) clearly. But reflect on them 
deeply and you get virtuesless meaning from them.  
Once, Lord Badrinarayana had arrived among the inhabitant sages of 
Kalaygram. 
DevaRishi Narada had asked him the same question. In the assembly of the 
great sages, Lord then narrated the same tale, which the inhabitants of 
Janloka had asked. 
The supreme sages like Sanakadi and his brothers were equal in knowledge, 
penance etc. Yet they chose Sanandan as the narrator, and rest three became 
the audience. Sanandan had said: "Such as the savants and balladiers sing in 
praise their king to wake him up in the morning, similarly annihilating the 
entire universe in Him, Paramatma (supreme soul) lies asleep with all His 
powers. At the end of Pralaya, Vedas (Shurtis) wake Him up through the words 
that demonstrate Him." Shrutis (Vedas) says: "O Ajit (invincible one), you are 
supreme, no one can conquer you; may you win everywhere. O Lord, you are 
complete with all the luxuries, hence destroy the illusion that allures all the 

947 
 



living beings. We are unable to describe your appearance. But when your 
powers manifest in creation. We get some ability to describe you. 
Description of Brahma, Indra, Agni, Surya and other Gods, by us (Vedas) 
appears as separate, The complete universe is not different from you. It is a 
description of your various forms. You are unborn, even in those idols. You do 
not take birth. 
All the Vedas describe your merits. All the savants love none but you through 
hearing and remembering of your auspicious, benevolent virtues. 
O, endless, if anybody in human incarnations does not recite or remember 
your name he is breathing in vain. 
Dharma (duty), Artha (wealth), Kama (sensual pleasure) and Moksha 
(salvation) have no meaning for those who remember you with pure heart. 
O endless, glorious Lord, common people are wandering in abject darkness of 
unnecessary disputes. Your realization is impossible. When will that moment 
arrive in my life. When I shall recite your names like Madhav, Vamana, 
Trilochan, Govind etc. with joy and get free from all the miseries. 
O Lord, this entire universe is false. But still appears as real. We pray to that 
God who is present as an illuminating truth in this false creation.O Lord of all, 
people can not sail across this ocean of death without you, no matter what 
they do to achieve salvation. Their all efforts are futile. 
O Lord, all the living beings are wandering in your illusion. But the learned 
ones don't regard themselves separate from the cycle of life and death. In 
your shelter, they have nothing to fear. 
Shukdev says: "Parikshit as per your query, I told you how Vedas describe 
Parabrahma Paramatma who is free from natural virtues and invisible. O king, 
it is the Lord who conceptualizes the universe and is present in the beginning, 
mid and the end of it. He is the Lord of nature and creatures. It is He who 
created the universe and entered it with the creatures. He created the bodies 
and controls them. Such as a human being, who is immersed in deep sleep, is 

948 
 



not aware of his body. Similarly, on receiving God, the creature is freed from 
illusion. So one must continuously reflect on the virtues of Lord Sri Krishna."  
RELEASE OF LORD SHIVA FROM CRISIS  
Parikshit asked: "Gurudev, those among the Gods, human beings and the 
demons, who worship Lord Lord Shiva, get wealth very soon. But those, who 
worship Lord Narayana, remain afflicated with scarcity. What is the reason for 
that?" Shukdev said : "Parikshit, your grandfather Yudhisthira had put the 
same question before Lord Krishna." In reply, Lord Krishna had said: "O 
Yudhisthira, I take away all the wealth from those whom I bestow my grace. 
When they are poor, their relatives desert them. I even render their efforts 
useless when they try to earn money. Thus being unsuccessful repeatedly, the 
people develop an attitude of indifference for wealth. Then they begin to take 
shelter as my devotee and mingle with me. Only then, I bestow my full grace 
on them and they receive me as Sachchidanand Parbrahma. Thus, pleasing me 
through my worship is extremely difficult. Hence, ordinary people give me up 
and worship other deities, which are in fact different forms of me. 
Lord Shiva is Ashutosh and bestows his devotees quickly with grace. He gives 
wealth and other riches to his devotees. But once they get wealth, the 
devotees become despotic and even forget the God who had blessed them." 
In this context Shukdev narrated one ancient tale to Parikshit. 
Once upon a time, there was a demon Vrikasur. He had pleased Lord Shiva 
and sought a boon that the person, upon whose head the demon put his 
hand, should be incinerated at once. Lord Shiva granted the boon without 
considering the consequences. But as soon as the demon got this supernatural 
power, he ran to incinerate Lord Shiva first. The demon was eyeing Gauri 
Parvati, so he was determined to eliminate Lord Shiva. Now afraid of his own 
boon, Lord Shiva ran for his life, with the demon following him in hot pursuit. 
At last Lord Shiva reached in Vaikunth and told Lord Vishnu about his crisis. 
Lord at once illusioned the demon and made him put his hand, on his own 
head. By the virtue of the boon, the demon was incinerated in no time and 
thus Lord Shiva could be saved. 

949 
 



TESTING OF TRINITY 
Once upon a time, all the sages assembled on the bank of Saraswati river. A 
dispute errupted among them as to who among the trinity was the greatest. 
By consensus they appointed sage Bhrigu to test the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu 
and Mahesh. Bhrigu reached to Brahma, but did not greet him. Brahma got 
infuriated but since the sage Bhrigu was his own son, He did not curse him. 
Then Bhrigu visted Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva proceeded to embrace the sage. But 
instead of accepting Lord Shiva's welcome, the sage began to abuse Him, 
saying: "You violate the dignity of Vedas, so I will not meet with you." Angry 
Lord Shiva raised his trident to kill him, but Bhagavati stopped Him. At last 
Bhrigu reached Vaikunth to see Lord Vishnu. 
Lord was lying with head in the lap of Lakshmi. Bhrigu kicked hard at His chest. 
But instead of getting angry, Lord got up, bowed his head before the sage and 
begged pardon: "O Sage, pardon me, I could not welcome you at once, at your 
arrival. Your feet are soft, I hope they are not hurt. 
All my sins have been washed by the touch of your feet." Bhrigu felt very 
pleased by the serious talks of Lord. His heart felt overwhelmed with excess of 
devotion. He returned to the assembly of the sages and narrated his 
experience. Since then Lord Vishnu is regarded as the Supreme and giver of 
peace and fearlessness. 
REVIVAL OF BRAHMIN'S DEAD CHILDREN  
There in Dwaraka lived a Brahmin. When the first son was born to his wife, it 
died immediately after birth. The Brahmin took his dead son to the royal court 
and complained: "My Son has died because of anti-Brahmin and licentious 
actions of the king." One by one, thus, eight sons were born to the Brahmin 
couple; but they all died immediately after birth. And the Brahmin kept on 
dumping his dead sons at the gate of the royal palace. 
When his ninth son was born, and died, Arjuna was also there in Dwaraka. He 
made a promise to the Brahmins: I shall guard your son or commit self 
immolation. At the time of next delivery, the agitated Brahmin came to 

950 
 



Arjuna. Training his bow and arrows, Arjuna made all arrangements to protect 
Brahmin's tenth son. Sanctified by many mantras, Arjuna's arrows constructed 
a fence around the labour room. A child took birth; but it too died after some 
time. Brahmin, then, cursed Arjuna. Arjuna scouted through all the three 
worlds and even the netherworlds in search of the Brahmin's dead son, but he 
could not find him anywhere. Ultimately accepting his failure and as per his 
promise, Arjuna proceeded to immolate himself. 
Meanwhile, Lord Krishna too learned about Arjuna's vow and stopped him 
from selfimmolation. 
Thereafter, riding a divine chariot, Lord set out with Arjuna, towards west. 
Beyond the limits of cosmos. They reached the abode of Lord Vasudev in 
Tripadvibhuti. There Arjuna saw that Lord was present in Purushaottams 
appearance. Sri Krishna and Arjuna greeted Him. 
Lord Purushaottam said in a serious voice: "O Krishna and Arjuna, only to have 
a sight of both of you, I brought the Brahmin's sons to me. Both of you had 
taken incarnation on earth from my part to protect the religion. All the 
demons have been slain by now. Now you too return to me. 
Sri Krishna and Arjuna again greeted Lord and returned on earth with all the 
sons of the Brahmin.Arjuna was greatly surprised to see the supreme abode of 
Lord. He felt that whatever strength a living being had, it was all by Sri 
Krishna's grace. Like common, ordinary people, the Lord stayed on earth 
enjoing mundane comforts, performed Yagyas like kings, behaved like 
idealistic people; deterred His subjects and slayed evil kings to re-establish 
religion on earth. 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN  
THE SAGES CURSE YADUVANSHIS  
Shukdev said: "O Parikshit, as the time passed, Yaduvanshis grew stronger and 
more influencial. Now no longer did they like the welcoming and treating of 
the great sages like Kanu, Dhrvasa, Maitreya, Dhannmy etc. by the Lord. Lord 

951 
 



Krishna knew about their disliking, but secretly He was pleased by this change 
in Yaduvanshi's behaviour, for He knew that by disregarding the saints and the 
scriptures, they would meet their end sooner. 
Once the Yaduvanshis clothed Jambvati's son Samb in a woman's attire and, 
showing him to the sages asked mockingly: "Maharaj, this is our sister-in-law. 
She is an expecting mother. She feels shy to ask but tell us what will be born 
to her? Through their unfailing vision, the Sages knew the reality and said: 
"Fools, a pestle shall be born to her and that pestle shall exterminate the 
entire Yaduvansh. Now all the Yaduvanshis were perplexed by sages' 
prediction, and approached their king Ugrasen. But, even the king was 
helpless now because he could not change the words the pious sages. 
In due course, a pestle was born to Samb. Frightened of an imminent fate, 
Yaduvanshis crushed the pestle into a fine powder and threw it into the sea. 
Only a nail remained, that also was thrown into the sea where a fish 
swallowed it. A fisher caught the fish and cut it open and found the nail. 
He gave it to a hunter. The hunter fixed the nail in the head of his arrow. On 
the other hand, the sea waves washed the powder of the pestle ashore where 
it germinated and grew as luxuriant grasses. Later on, once all the Yaduvanshis 
assembled at the sea-shore for a picnic where they drank wine and began to 
fight with one another under intoxication. Soon their quarrel grew so high 
that they pulled out the grasses, which were growing there, to use as the 
arms. With the grasses the Yaduvanshis beat one another to death. 
NARADA PREACHES VASUDEV ABOUT BHAGAVAT  
Once Narada arrived in Dwaraka. Vasudev prayed him and requested to 
provide him with pious company of Bhagavat dharma. Narada said: "O king, 
once upon a time, nine great sages arrived in the court of the king Janaka. 
King Janaka had put the same curiosity before them also. I will narrate the 
conversation that followed there between the sages and the king." First of all, 
the first Yogishwar Kavi said: "O king Janaka, dedication is the first duty 
(dharma) of a Vaishnav. He should devote everything - his actions, fruits of 

952 
 



actions and even himself, at the feet of Lord. He ought to hear about Lord's 
virtues. Such a devotee shall be indifferent to the worldly affairs and shall 
laugh, dance or sing occasionally and sanctified all the three worlds."The king 
then asked about the characteristics of the Lord's devotees. Another 
Yogeshwar Hari said: "A true devotee of the Lord remains unaffected by 
feelings like hunger, thirst, life, death, labour, pain, fear and desire. Such a 
devotee is the excellent kind of Bhagavat. Even the wealth of all the three 
worlds cannot shake the faith of such a devotee, because Lord Sri Hari himself 
stays in his heart.”  
“What is illusion?" A Yogeshwar Antariksh replied: "King, an illusion is also 
God's play. Having a possessive feeling about mundane is illusion. Thinking in 
terms of 'I', 'Me', 'Mine', 'My', 'You', 'Your' is also illusion. If one can have such 
an affection for God as he has for worldly things, one can easily surmount the 
illusion." King Janaka then asked about the method of worshipping Lord. A 
yogeshwar, Karbhajan said: " O king, the Lord had a fair complexion in Satya 
Yuga. People used to receive Him through methods like meditation, 
reconciliation, etc. In Treta Yuga, the Lord had reddish complexion and Yagyas 
were the main means to achieve Him. In Dwapar Yuga, the Lord had yellowish 
complexion and He could be pleased through worships. In the present Kali 
Yuga, Lord has dark complexion and one can receive Him through means like 
recitation, narration and hearing of His name and plays. 
Thus, Narada preached Vasudev about Bhagavat dharma. Now the heart and 
mind of Vasudev were thoroughly clean and pure. 
LORD DEPARTS TO HIS ABODE AND DESTRUCTION OF YADUVANSHIS  
To remind the Lord about the moment of His departure, Brahma arrived in 
Dwaraka accompanied by all the Gods. He prayed to Him: "O Lord, you have 
completed your duty of what we had once requested you. Now, You please 
return to your abode. Lord said: "On the seventh day from now, Dwaraka shall 
submerge in the sea and Yadavas shall fight among themselves to death. I too 
shall depart then. The arrow of a hunter shall be the cause of my departure." 
When Uddhava learned that Lord was about to wind up His plays, he 

953 
 



approached Him and said: "I understand, O Lord, that this all is happening by 
your wish. But I cannot part for a moment from your feet. Hence, take me also 
with you to your abode." Lord said: "Uddhava, I will not go anywhere. My 
entire brilliance will be present in Srimad Bhagavat. You stay here preaching 
Bhagavat dharma." Saying thus, Lord preached Uddhava about the Gita Jnana 
through the tale of Avadhoot. 
Lord narrated thus: "Uddhava,  
Once, our ancestor Yadu happened to see Lord Dattatreya in a forest. Lord 
was indulged in the supreme joy in the guise of Avadhoot. Yadu asked him 
about the reasons for his whimsical state." Avadhoot had said: "O king, 
making the various animals, birds, insects etc as my teacher, I have learned 
about spirituality from them. That is why I am free from mourning and 
attachment. Earth, air, sky, water, fire, the moon the sun, pigeon, python, sea, 
grasshopper, bumblebee, honey bee, elephant, extractor of honey, deer, fish, 
prostitute, osprey, boy, girls, arrow-maker, snake, spider and wasp are all my 
teachers. I took refuge at these twenty-four teachers and learned from their 
behaviour. 
I learned forgiveness from earth, purity from the sky, holiness and cleanliness 
from the water, innocence and renunciation from the fire; indifferentness 
from the air, to remain unaffected by circumstances from moon, abdication 
from the Sun, incoherence from the pigeon, dependence upon fate and 
remain effortless from the python, to remain always happy and serious from 
the sea, to be under the control of sense organs and hence meet total 
destruction from the grasshopper, acquiring of virtues from bumblebee, fault 
in cumulating from honey bee, to abstain sensuous talks from the deer, to 
eliminate greed from the fish, sorrow in hope and happiness in desperation 
from the prostitute, to feel happy in uncertainty from osprey, dispute among 
many from the girls, concentration from the arrow-maker, to roam alone and 
detachment from a particular place from the snake, virtues of the creator Lord 
from the spider, and I learned similarity from the wasp." In the guise of 
Avadhoot, Lord Dattatreya says: "O king, I learned wisdom and apathy from 

954 
 



my body also, because life, death, life and death again are inseparably 
intertwined with it. Hence the net result of loving this body is nothing but 
sorrow. Thus our own body also helps us to learn about metaphysical 
knowledge. 
Lord Krishna also explained Uddhava regarding futility of physical and 
heavenly luxuries. This human body is like a tree, on which two birds - Jivatma 
and Paramatma (microcosm and supreme soul) - have taken shelter. Two 
fruits - happiness and sorrow - appear on it. These fruits are eaten by Jivatma 
(micrososm) while Paramatma (supreme soul) stays as an indifferent 
onlooker. There are three kinds of Jiva - Baddh (Bound), Bhakta (devotee) and 
Mukta (liberated). Baddh Jivas (bound souls) are those who indulge in sensual 
pleasures and those who dislike pious company. Mukta Jiva (liberated souls) 
are those who are free from attachment and bindings. Bhaktas (devotees) are 
those who meditate on me and dedicate their everything in my feet and have 
love for my virtues. My devotee is kind, free from flaws, tolerant, has feeling 
of fraternity for all and controls his desires. 
BHIKSHU GEET  
Lord said: "Uddhava, in the world, there is indeed a dearth of such tolerant 
people who can tolerate bitter remarks of evil ones. In this context there is a 
tale of a greedy Brahmin who lived in Ujjain. That Brahmin had been badly 
tormented by the evil people after he had lost his wealth. 
But still the Brahmin did not lose his patience and regarding his present state 
as a result of his previous birth's deeds, he expressed his feelings thus: These 
people are not the cause of my miseries; neither the Gods, nor body, not even 
planets and time, can be blamed for my miseries. Scriptures and learned ones 
held the mind itself guilty of one's miseries. It is the mind that runs the cycle 
of the world and makes every kind of efforts. 
In the absence of mind, even the soul is rendered motionless. When one 
accepts the dictates of the mind and indulges in sensual pleasures, soul too 
comes to be bound with them. The ultimate outcome of all the spiritual 

955 
 



efforts like celibacy, study of Vedas etc. and abidance to pious actions is the 
concentration of mind. Concentration of mind and is abstaintation from 
sensual pleasures are the primary conditions for attainment of Param Yoga 
(supreme meditation). Thus Lord preached Uddhava about Jnana Gita. 
Uddhava too took Bhagavat (which is a form of the Lord) with honor and 
departed for Badrikashrama. 
 
CHAPTER TWELVE  
DESCRIPTION OF DYNASTIES IN KALI YUGA  
Shukdev describes about the dynasties that would occur in Kali Yuga. Ripunjay 
or Puranajay would be the last king of Brihdrath dynasty. This dynasty would 
be succeeded by the kings of Nand dynasty. Then a diplomatic Brahmin, 
named Chanakya, would exterminate this dynasty and enthrone Chandragupt 
Maurya. In Maurya dynasty, a great king would occur by the name of 
Ashokvardhan. After him, Yavans would rule then for six hundred and forty 
years. Their rule would be succeeded by the governance of the fair-
complexioned foreigners, who would rule for one hundred and sixty years. 
Thereafter, there would be no king and no subjects because people from all 
the classes would come forward to rule. 
The ruler would be selected by the majority votes. There would be no any 
thing like holyness. 
Cows would grow thin like nannies. People would not marry, as per their 
castes. Greed, selfishness and sex would be the base of marriage life. In 
adverse conditions, spouses would desert each other. There would be nothing 
like duty, responsibility and conduct. Hair would be the main item of 
adornment for the women. 
People would not have the knowledge of religious scriptures in Kali Yuga. 
Talkativeness would be identified with knowledge. Only those would be 
regarded as clever, who could pick others' pockets. Children would not regard 
or pay due respect to their parents. Children would maintain relations with 

956 
 



parents till their marriage only, not after that. Boys would not touch the feet 
of their own parents, but would pay full respect to their father and mother-in-
law, Brother-in-law would be dearer to them than their own brother. 
Shukdev says: Parikshit, Kali Yuga is the mine of faults, But it has only one 
great virtue - that the people will acquire divine position only by reciting 
Lord's name. Recitation of Lord's name, regardless of intention and 
motivation-- whether it is love, derision, laziness or malicenesswould destroy 
one's sins. 
But O Parikshit, the sinister people would do even the most difficult tasks in 
Kali Yuga, but they would not recite Lord's name. They would not have an 
interest in the Lord. Their interests would be more in sensuous things like 
sound, touch, beauty, scent etc. 
O Parikshit, the Paramagati (supreme salvation) that people could receive by 
ten thousand years of meditation in Satya Yuga; by performing Yagya for 
hundred years in Treta Yuga and by worshiping Lord's idol for ten years in 
Dwapar Yuga, that supreme salvation is easily available for people in Kali Yuga 
simply by reciting Lord's name for one day and one night continuously. 
But still, in Kali Yuga people would not have faith in Lord's name. It is their 
misfortune. Shukdev says: O Parikshit, recitation of Sri Hari has occurred in 
Srimad Bhagavat MahaPurana. 
O King, this soul is eternal, so you abandon this animal- like feeling that you 
would die. You are not the body. You are the eternal form of joy. Imbibe your 
mind with the reflections of Paramatma (supreme spirit) and have a sight of 
Him in the end. You are God yourself. Then neither Takshak nor death would 
do any harm to you. Unify yourself in the supreme being by thoughts like, 'I 
am Parabrahma.' Thus Shukdev assured Parikshit to be fearless. 
FINAL BEATITUDE OF PARIKSHIT AND NAGYAGYA OF JANMEJAY  
Thus graced by Shukdev, king Parikshit faithfully worshiped BrahmRishi and 
prayed to him with folded hands: "Lord, you are an idol of kindness. You have 
bestowed your graced on me narrating the plays of Lord Sri Hari. Now I am 

957 
 



saved and have achieved my natural state. You helped me receive the 
supreme position in my life alone. Now I can experience the soul as separate 
from my body." Accepting Parikshits worships, Shukdev made his departure. 
Parikshit himself achieved the status of the sage and concentrated his soul in 
supreme spirit. Thus, before Takshak could bite him, he was merged in 
Brahma. Takshak stung his physical body only, which was burnt by the effect 
of the sting. 
When Janmejay, the son of Parikshit, learned that a snake had stung his 
father, he organised, Sarpsatra. During the Satra, and invoked by the hymns of 
Brahmins, snakes drew from far and near and got burnt in the fire. Frightened 
Takshak approached Indra for refuge. Indra promised to help him. There, on 
earth, Janmejay asked the Brahmins: "Why has Takshak, the killer of my 
father, not arrived yet?" Through reconciliation, Brahmins saw that Takshak 
was clinging to Indra's throne. The Brahmin invoked Takshak along with Indra. 
Indra's throne began to move earthward. But then Brahaspati, the teacher of 
the Gods, intervened and stopped the Yagya. 
BRANCHES OF VEDAS AND DIVISIONS  
Suta described about the Samhitas and divisions of Vedas to the sages like 
Shaunak etc. Veda Vyasa divided Vedas into four parts and created four 
Sanhitas viz, Rig, Yajur, Sama and Atharva and taught Rigsanhita to Pail, Nigad 
sanhita to Vaishampayan, Chhandog Sanhita to Jemini and tought 
Atharvangiras Sanhita to Sumantu. All these four sages are the disciples of 
Veda Vyasa. 
PENANCE OF MARKANDEYA AND SIGHTING OF MAYA  
Suta narrated the tale of Mrikandu's son Markandeya. Taking shelter at 
Mahakal (Lord Shiva), Markandeya had turned away even Kal (death). And by 
penance had a sight of Lord Sri Narayana. He prayed God to show His Maya 
(illusion). Thus Markandeya saw the scene of Pralaya. All the creatures were 
drowning in the deluge. On a leaf of Banyan, then he saw Bal Mukund. 
Markandeya entered Lord's heart and saw endless cosmos there. Then, by 

958 
 



God's instinct, Markandeya returned to his hermitage. Thus Markandeya had 
the knowledge of Lord's metaphysical state.In the last chapters, a brief 
content of Bhagavat and glory of Lord's devotion have been discussed. Suta 
says: O great sages, I have described what you have asked on the occasion of 
this pious assemblage. That voice is useless, which cannot recite Lord's name 
and can not praise His virtues. All the sins and omens are destroyed by 
constant recitation of Lord's name. One then receives devotion for Lord with 
pure heart and begins to experience and feel God's tangible form. 
Though all the other Puranas contain description of Lord's appearance, but in 
Srimad Bhagavat Mahapurana, there is profuse description of Sri Hari in every 
chapter. Srimad Bhagavat has a confluence of knowledge, asceticism and 
devotion. One receives devotion for Lord and salvation eventually merely by 
reciting, listening and reflecting over it. 
Home   
  

959 
 



11. LINGA PURANA  
PART ONE  
SUTA NARRATES THE DIVINE TALES OF LINGA PURANA  
Once, sage, Narada arrived at Naimisharanya where he found many sages 
engaged in austerities. 
All the sages were delighted to see him. They eulogized him in reverence and 
offered him seat. 
Sage Narada narrated some amazing tales describing about the greatness of 
Linga Purana. This made the sages even more curious about Linga Purana. 
Right then, Suta also arrived there and the sages requested him to narrate the 
tales of Linga Purana. 
After making salutations to Lord Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh and Sage Krishna 
Dwaipayan, Suta said--- Sound is the medium through which the almighty 
Brahma manifests himself. Brahma manifests himself in the sacrosanct 
OMKAR mantra. Rigveda is his mouth, Samaveda his tongue, Yajurveda his 
neck and Atharvaveda is his heart. He is the Supreme Being and is beyond the 
reach of creation or deluge. He is one but manifests himself as three distinct 
deities--- Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra. These three deities are the expression of 
the three natural qualities respectively-Rajas, Satva and Tamas. He manifests 
himself as Mahesh in his formless (Nirguna) identity. He manifests himself in 
all the living creatures as well as imperceptible things in the form of seven 
natural elements-Mahattatva 
(5 basic elements) Ahankara (ego), Shabda (Sound) Sparsh (touch), Roop 
(appearance), Rasa (taste) and Gandha (smell). 
Lord Brahma compiled the divine tales of Linga Purana. It covers wide range of 
subjects like the beginning of creation, the origin of universe, description of 
the time, tales of different Kalpas, the greatness of Linga and its worship, tales 
related with Lord Shiva, characteristics of Shiva temple etc. It specially 
elaborates upon the greatness of Shivalinga and its worship. 

960 
 



FIRST CANTO  - PRATHAM SARG  
Shiva is both invisible as well as the root cause of all the delusions of the 
world. This is why Shiva is also known as Alinga (unknowable). Linga is nothing 
but the non-manifested (Auyakta) form of Shiva. This implies that the visible 
world is the medium through which Shiva manifests himself. Nature (Prakriti) 
in itself is devoid of qualities like smell, taste, touch etc. But, all these qualities 
become apparent in it only because of Shiva, who is imperishable and whose 
characteristics are the natural qualities like taste, smell, touch and sound. 
The whole world along with the gross and subtle has originated from Alinga 
Shiva. The whole world comes into being with the help of eleven components-
10 sense organs and mind. It is pervaded by the delusions of 'Alinga Shiva'. 
The three prominent deities---Brahma Vishnu and Mahesh are the 
manifestations of Shiva. He is the creator in the form of Brahma, the nurturer 
in the form of Vishnu and the annihilator in the form of Mahesh. 
Nature is pervaded by the delusion of Shiva, which is also known as Aja 
(unborn). The three basic colors -red, white and black are the symbolic 
expressions of the three qualities Raja, Sat and Tamo respectively. Majorities 
of people fall prey to the delusions of this world and get entangled in its 
illusionary appearances, but there are few that understand the futility of this 
illusionary world. 
With the desire of beginning creation, the supreme Almighty manifest himself 
in the imperceptible which results into the creation of the Mahattatva (five 
basic elements). From Mahattatva manifests the ego or 'ahankara which 
comprises of three gunas. From Ego manifests the Tanmantras or subtle forms 
of matter-sound, form, taste smell and touch. Among these subtle forms of 
matter, Sound came into being first of all and space originated from it. The 
second tanmantra, touch originated from the space. Air manifested from 
touch or sparsh. The third tanmantra, form or roopa originated from air or 
Yayu. Fire or Agni manifested from roopa. The fourth tanmantra, taste or rasa 
manifested from Agni. 

961 
 



Similarly, water or Jal manifested from Rasa, smell or Gandha from Jal and 
Earth manifested from Gandha respectively. 
All the five organs of action (Karmendriya) sense organs and mind originated 
from pure Ego (Satva ahankara). In course of time all these elements got 
transformed into a mammoth egg (Anda), inside which Lord Brahma 
manifested himself. The whole universe is said to be established inside the 
above mentioned egg. 
The egg is covered by seven layers and Lord Brahma dwells inside it, seated on 
a lotus flower. 
The mammoth egg contains crores of universes inside its fold. 
THE BEGINNING OF CREATION  
The whole creation lasts for the total period equivalent to Brahma's day. The 
almighty God created during daytime and annihilated during night. One day of 
Lord Brahma is equivalent to one Kalpa of this world. The cycle of four yugas 
occur periodically for 1000 times, during which period altogether fourteen 
Manus take incarnation, one after another. Satya Yuga consists of 4000 years. 
Fifteen Nimesha make one Kashtha (unit of time measurement) Thirty Kalas 
make a Muhurta, fifteen Muhurta a day and night each. The dark lunar phase 
is said to be the day, while bright lunar phase is said to be the night of the 
manes. One year of this world consists of 360 days. The deities' day lasts for 
the full period, when the sun is positioned towards the north of equator. 
Similarly, the deities' night lasts for the total period when the sun is positioned 
towards the south of equator. One year of the deities is equivalent to thirty 
years of this world. Similarly three months of the deities are equivalent to one 
hundred months of this world. 
Each of the four yugas is measured on the basis of divine years. Satya Yuga is 
equivalent to 40,000 divine years, while Treta Yuga is equivalent to 80,000 
divine years. Dwarpar Yuga is equivalent to 20,000 years of the deities, while 
Kali Yuga is equivalent to 60,000 years of the deities. The period of each yuga 
given here is exclusive of the periods of Sandhya (evening) and Sandhyansh 

962 
 



(part of evening.) Lord Brahma commences creation at the fag end of night 
and all his creations exist for the whole day. When the night descends, 
everything is annihilated. This is the time when Kalpa ends. 
THE ORIGIN OF CREATION  
In the initial phase of his creation, Lord Brahma created immovable natural 
things like trees, mountains etc-then birds and animals. In the process of 
creation, he created various things and human being was his seventh creation. 
First of all Lord Brahma created his Manasputras- Sanak, Sanandan etc, who 
had no worldly desires. He then created the nine supreme sages---Marichi, 
Bhrigu, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksha, Atri and Vashishtha by the 
help of his yogic powers. After that, it was the turn of the twelve Prajapatis-
Ribhu, Sanatkumar, Sanatan etc. All of them were divine, extremely virtuous 
and had realized the supreme - self, Brahma.Shatarupa had begotten four 
children from Swayambhuva Manu-Priyavrata, Uttanpad, Akuti and Prasuti. 
Akuti was married to a Prajapati named Ruchi, while Prasuti married Daksha. 
Akuti gave birth to two children- Dakshaina and Yagya. Dakshaina had twelve 
sons. Prasuti, the youngest daughter of Shatarupa had begotten twenty four 
daughters from Yaksha-Shradha, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Tushti, Pushti, Megha, Kriya, 
Buddhi, Lajja, Vapu, Siddhi, Keerti, Khyati, Sambhuti, Smriti, Preeti, Kshama, 
Sannati, Anusuya, Urja, Swaha, Sura Arani and Swadha. Thirteen of them were 
married to Dharma, a Prajapati. Khyati was married to sage Bhrigu while Arani 
married sage Bhargava. Similarly various sages like Marichi, Angira, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Ritu, Atri and Vashishtha got married with Sambhuti, Smriti, Preeti, 
Kshama, Sannati Anusuya and Urja respectively. Swaha was married to 
Vibhavasu while Swadha married the Pitrishwaras. 
Dharma had begotten all together 15 sons from his thirteen wives- Kam, Darp, 
Niyam, Santosh, Alobha, Shrut, Dand, Samay, Bodi, Mahadyuti, Apramadd, 
Vinay, Vyavasay, Kshem, Sukh and Yash. Khyati, wife of sage Bhrigu gave birth 
to Sri who later became the consort of Lord Vishnu. 
She also had two sons named Dhata and Vidhata. 

963 
 



Prabhuti, wife of sage Marichi gave birth to two sons- Puranama and Marich. 
She also had four daughters- Tushti, Drishti, KRishi and Apachi. Kshama, wife 
of Sage Pulaha had many offspring among whom Kardam and Sahishnu were 
prominent. Preeti, wife of Sage Pulastya had two sons named Dattarnavr and 
Dahvahu. She also had a daughter named Dwashdwati. Kratu's wife, Sannati 
had six thousand offspring who became famous as Balkhilyas. 
Smriti, wife of Sage Angiras had given birth to five daughters--- Sini, Vali, Kuhu, 
Raka and Anumati. Anusuya, wife of Sage Atri had six children-five sons and 
one daughter. The names of the sons were - Satyanetra, Bhavyamuni, 
Murtiray, Shanaishchar and Somatha. Urja, wife of sage Vashishtha gave birth 
to seven sons- Jyayji, Pundarikaksh, Raj, Suhotra, Bahu, Nishpap, Shravana, 
Tapasvi and Shukra. Agni's consort Swaha gave birth to three sons- Pavaman, 
Pavak and Shuchi. 
LORD SHIVA - THE SUPREME LIBERATOR  
Sati, daughter of Daksha had married Lord Shiva much against the wish of her 
father.  
Once, Daksha organized a grand yagya in which he did not invite his son-in-
law. Sati went to attend the yagya ceremony inspite of Shiva's forbiddance. 
After seeing her, Daksha calumniated Lord Shiva and made fun of him. This 
infuriated her to such an extent that she gave up her life by jumping into the 
sacrificial fire. She was born as Parvati in her next birth and once again got 
Shiva as her husband. 
Once, Lord Brahma requested Shiva to create a world, which was free from 
death. Lord Shiva refused apprehending its disastrous consequences. Lord 
Brahma was left with no other option than to commence creation on his own. 
Meanwhile, Shiva became immovable just like the trunk of a tree (sthanu). 
Lord Shiva, who is capable of attaining any form. He showers benediction on 
mankind. He is engrossed in the supreme state of Yoga with effortless case. 
Nobody can attain liberation without his grace. He is the bestower of 
religiousness (Dharma), knowledge (Jnana), asceticism (Vairagya) and 

964 
 



splendour (Aishwarya). Sinners who do not take refuge in Shiva have to 
experiences the unbearable tortures of countless hells. 
INCARNATIONS OF MANU AND VYASA  
On being asked about the incarnation of Sage Vyasa during various eras and 
Manvantars, Suta replied- O Brahmin! Now I am going to mention the names 
of all the incarnations of Vyasa who existed during Vaivasvat manvantar of 
Varaha kalpa. The names are as follows- Ritu, Satya, Bhargava, Angira, Savita, 
Mrityu, Shatakratu, Vashishtha, Saraswat, Tridhatma, Trivrit, Swayam, Dharm, 
Narayan, Tarakshu, Aruni, Kritanjay, Trina, Bindu, Ruksha, Muni, Shakti, 
Parashar, Jatukarnya and Sri Krishna Dwaipayan. 
The names of Manu's belonging to different manvantars of Varaha kalpa are- 
Swayambhu, Swarochi's, Uttam, Tamas, Raivat, Chakchhus, Vaivaswat, 
Savarni, Dharmasavarni, Vishang, Avishang, Shabal and Varnak. All of these 
Manu's were named according to their appearances and complexions. For 
example vaivaswat Manu was of dark complexion. 
THE ESSENCE OF YOGA 
Yoga means union with God. The state of yoga is impossible to attain without 
the blessings of Lord Shiva. It needs a concentrated and focussed mind. There 
are some specific spots in the human body concentrating upon which, enables 
a man to attain the state of yoga-spot between the eyebrows, lower part of 
the throat, navel and six inches above it etc. 
The state of yoga can never be attained until and unless a person has fully 
controlled the tendencies of sense organs. It can be achieved with the help of 
eight means- Yama (penance), Niyam (discipline), Asan (posture), Pranayama 
(breath-control), Pratyahar (restraint of passion), Dharan (retention), Dhyan 
(concentration) and Samadhi (deep meditation). Each of them holds an 
important position in the path of yoga. 
Describing about the methods of performing yoga, Suta says--- A person 
should sit with his legs crossed in Padmasan and try to concentrate his mind 
by fixing his gaze between his eyebrows. 

965 
 



He should keep his spine erect. He should meditate either on the form of 
Omkar or on the form of Lord Shiva. Breath control is an important aspect of 
yogic exercise. A man should exhale deeply for 32 times and then breathe in 
deeply. He should then retain his breath as long as possible and visualize Lord 
Shiva within his body. By constant practice he will achieve mastery over this 
art and a time will come when he will experience divine bliss. This divine bliss 
can not be experienced unless one has attained a deep state of meditation 
(Samadhi). 
OBSTACLES IN THE PATH OF YOGA  
A man experiences numerous obstacles in the path of Yoga-laziness, 
restlessness confusion, a diseased body etc. The main reason for being lazy is 
a bulky physique and one's inability to concentrate his mind. Lack of 
concentration results in restlessness, which is a major obstacle in the path of 
yoga. If a person in unsure about the results he becomes confused. It is 
impossible for a person suffering from any disease to concentrate his mind. 
All the above mentioned hurdles can be overcome by firm resolution. A man 
who has successfully overcome all these obstacles might experience other 
obstacles in the form of siddhis (divine powers). There is a real danger of 
getting lured by these divine powers. As a result his mind may get distracted 
from his original goal and he may Deviate from his path. The names of these 
siddhis or divine powers are-Pratibha (having knowledge of past present and 
future incident), Shravana (being capable of listening to abnormal sounds), 
Varta (whatever is said becomes true), Darshana (capable of seeing things 
which can mot be seen by the mortal eyes), Aswada (being capable of 
experiencing divine (tastes), Vedana (being capable of relieving other's pain by 
a mere touch). If a person successfully overcomes all these allurements then 
he becomes a siddha- or man of accomplishment and divine powers. 
REALISATION OF SHIVA  

966 
 



Lord Shiva showers his blessing on one and all without any discrimination, but 
virtuous people have special privilege in the sense that it is easier for them to 
realize Lord Shiva. 
Once, Parvati asked Lord Shiva as to how a devotee could realize him. Lord 
Shiva recalled an incident when Lord Brahma had asked the same question. 
Lord Shiva had told Lord Brahma-"Anybody can realize me by having deep 
devotion towards me. A devotee can meditate upon me in the form of Linga 
with total devotion. It is only by deep devotion that a man can achieve true 
knowledge as well as salvation."  
VENERABLENESS OF SADYOJAT  
The sages asked Suta as to how was Lord Brahma able to have a divine 
glimpse of Sadyojat. Suta replied- During the Kalpa named Shwetalohit, once 
Lord Brahma witnessed the manifestation of a divine child who was of mixed 
(red and white) complexion. The child had a Shikha (topknot) on his head. 
Considering him to be an embodiment of almighty God, Lord Brahma 
eulogized that child. Suddenly four children appeared and formed a protective 
ring around Sadyojat. The names of these children were- Sunand, Nandan, 
Vishwanand, and Upanand. All of them were of fair complexion and very 
handsome.Anybody who is desirous of attaining to Rudraloka must take 
refuge in Sadyojat. 
LORD VAMDEV  
Once, during thirtieth kalpa named Rakta, Lord Brahma was meditating on 
Paramaeshthi Shiva. 
Suddenly a divine child appeared before him who was of red complexion and 
who had put on red apparels. He was none other than Lord Vamdev. Lord 
Brahma immediately realized the divinity of that child and was convinced that 
he was the embodiment of Almighty God. 
Lord Brahma eulogized Vamdev who was pleased by his devotions. Four divine 
entities-Virija, Vivahu, Vishoka and Vishwabhavana manifested from the body 
of Vamdev. All of them had great resemblance to Lord Vamdev. Vamdev 

967 
 



preached them on the finer points of religiousness so that mankind could be 
benefited by this knowledge. 
LORD TAT PURUSHA  
The thirty-first kalpa was known as Peet Kalpa. The term 'Peet' means yellow 
and this Kalpa was named Peet because Lord Brahma had put on yellow 
apparels during this Kalpa.  
Once, while he was meditating on the form of Lord Shiva, a divine child 
manifested before him. The child had a halo of light all around him and had 
put on yellow coloured clothes. Even his turban, sacredthread and garland 
were yellow in colour. His arms were abnormally long. 
Lord Brahma immediately realized that the child was none other than Lord 
Maheshwar himself. 
Suddenly a divine cow appeared from the mouth of Maheshwar, who had four 
faces and possessed all the thirty-two qualities. The divine cow was none 
other than Goddess Gayatri herself. Lord Brahma eulogized her and 
Maheshwar was very pleased by his deep devotion. 
Maheshwar also blessed him with divine knowledge and unrevealed the 
secret of yoga to him. 
Right then, many divine children appeared from the body of Lord Maheshwar. 
Each of them had put on yellow apparels and had great resemblance to Lord 
Maheshwar. They were extremely virtuous and served the mankind by giving 
sermons. After having completed their mission of spreading the message of 
virtuosity to the mankind, all of them got united with Lord Maheshwar 
ultimately.A person, who is desirous of getting liberated from all his sin, must 
seek the blessings of Lord Maheshwar who is also known as Tat Purusha. 
LORD AGHORESH  
Peet kalpa was followed by Pradhritta kalpa. Black was the predominant 
colour of this kalpa. 

968 
 



Initially, the whole earth was submerged in the water and Lord Brahma 
desirous of commencing his creations wished for a son. As a result, a divine 
child manifested whose complexion was dark. Not only that he had put on 
black apparels and a black crown on his head. A black sacred thread was 
hanging across his shoulder. 
Lord Brahma immediately recognized Aghoresh and eulogized him. Lord 
Aghoresh became pleased by his devotion and blessed him. Just like the 
preceding Kalpas, four divine children manifested from Lord Aghoresh's body. 
All of them had great resemblance with Aghoresh in every respect. In course 
of time, they did tremendous penance and preached the virtue of 
religiousness to the mankind. A person who worships Lord Aghoresh and has 
deep devotion in him becomes liberated from gravest of sins like Brahmhatya 
(sin acquired due to killing a Brahmin) etc. 
LORD ISHAN  
In the beginning of Vishwaroopa kalpa, Lord Brahma, desirous of commencing 
creation was engrossed in deep meditation. This resulted into the 
manifestation of a divine cow, which puzzled Lord Brahma very much. 
Actually, this divine cow was none other then Vishwaroopa Saraswati, but 
Lord Brahma failed to recognize her. Lord Brahma decided to take the help of 
Lord Ishan and started meditating on him. 
When Lord Ishan appeared before him, he was requested by Lord Brahma to 
shed light on the identity of that divine cow. Lord Ishan replied by saying-"The 
present kalpa is called Vishwaroopa kalpa. It has originated from the left side 
of my body and is the thirty-third kalpa. 
This divine cow has also originated from me. She is Goddess Gauri-the source 
of all creation. 
After saying like this, Lord Ishan created four divine entities from the body of 
the cow-Jati, Mundi, Shikhandi and Ardhamund. All of them were very 
luminous and virtuous. After preaching the world for thousands of divine year. 
They got reunited with Lord Rudra. 

969 
 



THE ORIGIN OF SHIVALINGA  
The sages asked Suta--- Lord Shiva is formless then how come Shivalinga is 
worshipped? What is the significance of Shivalinga? What is the proper 
method of worshipping a Shivalinga? Suta replied---  
Once, Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu developed serious different on the matter 
of superiority. A tremendous duel broke out between them. As they were 
fighting a mammoth Linga appeared on the scence, the effulgence of which 
made efforts both of them amazed. Both of them decided to find out the 
origin of that divine Linga. Lord Brahma transformed his appearance into that 
of a swan and flew up in the sky to determine the height of that Linga. Lord 
Vishnu transformed himself into a roar and entered the depth of earth to find 
the source of that Shivalinga. But both of them failed in their objectives and 
returned to the same place exhausted. 
Suddenly, they heard a loud sound of AUM emanating from the Shivalinga. 
Very soon, the whole form of OM, consisting of all the three letters A, U and 
M became visible. (The letters A, U and M symbolize Lord Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahesh respectively). 
At last, both of them realized their mistake and stopped quarrelling. This way, 
Lord Shiva was successful in subduing their arrogance. Lord Rudra is beyond 
sensual perception. He is the supreme Almighty and the bestowers of divine 
bliss. The mystical form of Shivalinga is a symbolical expression of sacred 
mantra-AUM. The letter A symbolizes Beeja (Seed), M the creator himself and 
U is the symbolical expression of Yoni (Vagina). 
Lord Rudra is beyond sensual perception. He is the supreme Almighty and the 
bestowers of divine bliss. The mystical form of Shivalinga is a symbolical 
expression of sacred mantra-AUM. 
The letter A symbolizes Beeja (Seed), M the creator himself and U is the 
symbolical expression of Yoni (Vagina). 
 
PART TWO  

970 
 



LORD SHIVA BLESSES BRAHMA and VISHNU  
At the time, when this incident of mystical Shivalinga had occurred and after 
which Lord Brahmand Vishnu had stopped quarelling, Lord Shiva appeared 
before them and said--- "I am very pleased with both of you, Both of - "O 
Vishnu! You are the creator, Lord Shiva. This made Lord Shiva extremely 
pleased and he the preserver as well as the destroyer of this world. I am the 
supreme you, though having distinct identities have actually manifested from 
my body- Brahma from my left side and Vishnu from my right." almighty and 
distinct from all three of you- Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh. Lord Vishnu 
expressed his undiluted devotion towards Lord Shiva. This made Lord Shiva 
extremely pleased and he said. 
"O Vishnu! You are the creator, the preserver as well as the destroyer of this 
world. I am the supreme almighty and distinct from all three of you- Brahma, 
Vishnu and Mahesh." Linga is the personification of the Almighty God. The 
term Linga means fusion and the Shivalinga are said to be the symbolical 
expression of all the deities. 
THE MANIFESTATION OF LORD BRAHMA  
The Sages requested Suta to elucidate how Lord Brahma emerged from the 
navel of Vishnu seated on a lotus flower.Suta replied--- At the time of deluge 
Lord Vishnu went in his yoganidra lying on the back of Sheshnag. As the result 
of his divine play, a huge lotus flower along with a long tubular stalk emerged 
from his navel. Lord Brahma was seated on the Lotus flower. When Lord 
Brahma saw Lord Vishnu, he asked-"Who are you sleeping in this ocean?'' Lord 
Vishnu also asked the same question as to whom was he and from where had 
he manifested. Very soon, a quarrel ensures between them. Desirous of 
knowing the identity of the stranger, Lord Vishnu entered Brahma's abdomen 
through his mouth. He was amazed to find the existence of whole universe 
inside Brahma's abdomen. He remained there for thousands of year but could 
not find the end. Being exhausted, he came out and told Lord Brahma that 
even his abdomen had the same unlimited expanse. 

971 
 



Lord Brahma decided to check the authenticity of Vishnu's statement and 
entered into his abdomen through the mouth. Lord Brahma wandered inside 
the abdomen for thousands of year but could not find the end. Mean while, 
Lord Vishnu has shut each and every opening of his body which made it 
impossible for Lord Brahma to come out. Ultimately he was successful in 
coming out through the tubular stalk of the lotus. As Lord Brahma was not 
amused by Vishnu's behaviour, he started fighting with him. Right at that 
moment, Lord Mahadeva arrived there. His moments created high tide and 
strong mind, which vigorously shook the lotus flower. 
Lord Vishnu immediately realized that these signs forebode the arrival of 
Mahadeva. He revealed this fact to Brahma and about Manadev's greatness. 
But Lord Brahma was not impressed. Lord Vishnu then said --- "Shiva is the 
almighty God. He is the one, whom, enlightened people are always in search 
for. 
He manifests himself in the form of an egg on account of the union of his 
formless and with form appearances. In course of time the egg gets divided 
into two halves, from which are created the different Lokas (world). The egg is 
the very place from where originates the whole creation. 
Even you (Brahma) own your existence to that egg. Your arrogance might 
invite the wrath of Shiva. So, come let both of us eulogize and praise the holy 
name of Mahadeva. 
LORD BRAHMA BECOMES THE CREATOR At last, Lord Vishnu was successful in 
convincing Brahma of Shiva's supreme status. Both of them eulogized and 
sang hymns in the praise of Lord Shiva.Lord Shiva became very pleased by 
their devotion. He requested Lord Vishnu wanted nothing else but undiluted 
devotion in him. 
Lord Shiva agreed and said "So be it". 
Lord Shiva then blessed Brahma and made him the creator. Lord Brahma did a 
tremendous penance, which continued for a very long period. The severe 
penance strained his eyes as a result of which tears started rolling down his 

972 
 



cheeks. Poisonous snakes manifested from those teardrops. Lord Brahma 
became disillusioned by his maiden creation and gave up his life. Eleven 
Rudras emerged from his body and started wailing. They then brought Lord 
Brahma back to life. 
After becoming alive, Lord Brahma eulogized Vishveshwar and Goddess 
Gayatri. He was amazed to see the existence of whole universe inside the 
body of Lord Vishveshwar all the kalpas including the different incarnations of 
Lord Shiva about origin of these kalpas and various incarnations like sadya, 
etc.  
DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERENT KALPAS  
Lord Shiva revealed to Brahma that the Shwet-kalpa derived its name from his 
complexion. "I took incarnation attired in white apparels. My complexion was 
fair. You being self-begotten were able to recognize me. Goddess Gayatri had 
also manifested from my body and later on became famous as 'Shwet-Lohit-
Brahm'.”  
“The next kalpa was known as Lohit kalpa because of my red complexion, 
Goddess Gayatri had also incarnated in the form of divine cow. I became 
famous as Vamdev during this kalpa." Lord Shiva then went on to describe 
about the rest of the kalpas which had been named after his complexion. He 
also gave in-depth description of various subjects like, the different worlds, 
the vedas the four major castes etc. 
INCARNATIONS OF SHIVA DURING VARIOUS DWAPAR YUGAS  
On being enquired by Lord Brahma about his various incarnations, Lord Shiva 
said --- "I shall incarnate as Shwet-Mahamuni during first Dwapar Yuga of 
Vaivaswat manvantar. My abode shell is at Chhogal peak of Himalaya 
mountain. I shall have four disciples who will be proficient in the Vedas.”  
“I will incarnate as Sutar during second dwapar. At that time, Saddyojat 
Prajapati will be holding he post of Vyasa.I will have four sons- Dundubhi, 
Shataroopa, Richika and Keluma.”  

973 
 



“During third dwapar and at the time when Sage Bhargav will be acting as a 
Vyasa, I will take incarnation as Daman. I will have four sons- Vikrosh, Vikesh, 
Vipash and Papnashak.”  
“During fourth dwapar and at the time when Sage Angira will be acting as a 
Vyasa, I will take incarnation as Suhotra. I will have four sons- Sumukh, 
Durmukh, Durdhar and Duratikram.”  
“I will take incarnation as Kank during fifth dwapar and at the time when Sage 
Savita will be fulfilling the obligations of Vyasa; I will have four sons- Sanak, 
Sanandan, Sanatan and Sanatkumar.”  
“During Sixth dwapar, I will take incarnation as Laugakshi. At that time Sage 
Mrityu will be holding the post of Vyasa. My sons will be Sudhama, Viraja, 
Shankh and Padraj.”  
“Sage Shataritu will act as Vyasa during Seventh dwapar. I will have four sons- 
Saraswat, Megh, Meghvah and Suvahan.”  
“Sage Vashishtha will be the Vyasa during eighth dwapar. I will take 
incarnation as Dadhivahan. 
My sons will be- Kapila, Asuri, Panch, Shikhomuni and Vashkal.""Sage 
Saraswat will act as Vyasa during nineth dwapar. I will take incarnation as 
Rishabh. I will have four sons- Parashar, Garg, Bhargav and Angiras.”  
“The tenth dwapar will see Tripad fulfilling the duties of Vyasa. I will incarnate 
as Bhavita Muni. I will have four sons- Bala, Bandhu, Niramitra and Ketu.”  
“Sage Trivat will be the Vyasa during eleventh dwapar. I will take incarnation 
as Ugra. My sons will be- Lambodar, Lambaksha and Lambakesh.”  
“Sage Shatateja will perform the duties of Vyasa during twelfth dwapar. I will 
have four sonsSarvagya, Sambuddhi, Sadhya and Sarva.”  
“Dharma will be the Vyasa during thirteenth dwapar. I will take incarnation as 
Bali and live at the hermitage of the Balkhilya. I will have four sons- Sudhama, 
Kashyapa, Vashishtha and Viraja." This way, Lord Shiva elaborated upon his 

974 
 



various incarnations till the period of twenty-eight dwapar, which went as 
follows. 
RITUALS OF SHIVA-LINGA WORSHIP (PURITY)  
Once, Goddess Parvati asked Lord Shiva about the proper methods of 
worshipping Shivalinga. 
While Shiva was elucidating upon the rituals, Nandi who was present there 
too got enlightened on this sacred topic. In course of time, this knowledge 
was passed on to Sanatkumar, who in turn revealed it to Sage Vyasa. Suta 
came to know about it from Shailadi.Lord Shiva had described the following 
three methods, by the help of which a devotee should become pure before 
DWAPAR VYASA SHIVA SHIVA'S SONS 14th Tarakshu Gautam Atri, Devarudra, 
Shravana & Srivishthak 15th Traiyyaruni Vedshira Kuni, Kunibahu, Kusharir & 
Kunetrak 16th Deva Gokarn Kashyao, Shukracharya, Chyavn & Brihaspati 17th 
Kritanjay Guhavasi Utathya, Vamadev, Mahayoga & Mahabal 18th Ritanjay 
Shikhani Vachashrava,Richik,Shyavasva& Yatishwar 19th Bhardwaj Jatamali 
Hiranyabh, Kaushal, Laungaksi & Kuthumi 20th Gautam Attahas Sumantu, 
Varvari, Kavand & Kushi Kandar 21st Vachashrava Daruko Ramapksoda, 
Bhayani, Ketuman & Gautam. 
22nd Shushmayan Langli Bheem Dharmik, Mahayotri, Bhallavi, 
Madhupinga,Shwetu, Ketu & Kush 23rd Trinabindu Kalanjar Ushik, 
Vrihadashva, Deval & Kavirevach 24th Riksha Shooli Salihotra, Agnivesh, 
Unasva & Sharadvasu. 
25th Shakti DandiMundishvar Chhagal, Kundak, Kumbhand & Prawahaj 26th 
Parashar Sahishnu Ulook, Viddyut, Shambuk & Ashwalayan. 
27th Jatuk Karnya Somsharma Akshapad, Kumar, Ulook & Vatsa. 
28th Dwaipayan Lakuli Kushik, Garg, Mitra & Kaurushyacommencing his 
worship. 1. Varuna Snan (taking bath in open) 2. Bhashma Snan (smearing 
ashes) 3. Mantra Snan (chanting of mantra) Lord Shiva had stressed upon the 
importance of taking bath in a river or a pond. According to him a man's mind, 
which is like a lotus, could never blossom unless it received the radiance of the 

975 
 



sun. Describing about the methods of taking Bhasmasnan, he said-After 
washing his hands and feet, a devotee should smear any of the following 
things on his body to make it pure-mud, cowdung ashes etc. While smearing 
mud on his body, he should chant the mantra - UddhatashiVarahaen. After 
becoming pure according to the methods mentioned above, he should then 
worship Lord Varuna. Having done, this, he should take a dip in the river after 
purifying the water by chanting the sacred 'Adhamarshan' mantra. He should 
then worship all the deities by sprinkling water from the Shankh (Conch) and 
amidst the chanting of mantras like 'Rudren Pavamanaen' etc. He should then 
concentrate upon the form of a Shivalinga. He should drink some water 
holding some Kusha grass in his right hand simultaneously. 
A devotee should commence his worship only after becoming pure. In the 
beginning he should perform Pranayama for three times so that his lungs are 
filled up with fresh air. After this, he should concentrate his mind on the form 
of Lord Trayambak in all his glory. He should purify all the articles required for 
the worship by performing ablution and by chanting OM NAMAH SHIVAY. He 
should also make offerings of flowers, rice grains, barley etc. to the deity. 
Worship of Lord Shiva is believed to be incomplete without the worship of his 
family-Nandi, Kartikeya, Vinayak and Goddess Parvati. So, the devotee must 
not forget to worship them. 
LORD SHIVA TESTS THE PATIENCE OF SAGES  
Once upon a time, the sages were busy doing their penance to please Lord 
Mahadeva. Lord Shiva decided to test patience and visited daruk forest in 
naked position. By the virtue of his divine power, he was successful in 
corrupting the conduct of the sage's wives. Those women became so 
infatuated by his divine appearance that they lost control omen themselves. 
They were desirous of satiating their lust but Shiva maintained silence and did 
not oblige them. 
When the sages saw the womenfolk in such a pitiable condition, they started 
abusing Lord Shiva. 

976 
 



Lord Shiva did not respond and disappeared from the scene. Now, the sages 
became very frightened. All of them went to Lord Brahma and narrated the 
whole incident. Lord Brahma reprimanded them by saying that how 
unfortunate they had been in not recognizing Lord Shivathe Almighty. Lord 
Brahma said- "You have committed a grace sir by showing disrespect to your 
guest. Your conduct was unlike Sudarshan, a Brahmin who by his hospitality 
was able to win the Lord of death." Lord Brahma narrated the following tale to 
them --- " 
Once there lived a kind hearted Brahmin named Sudarshan. He was very 
hospitable and considered his guests, as Lord Shiva himself. He had given 
strict instructions to his wife that under no circumstance should a guest return 
unsatisfied from his home.""Dharmaraj wanted to test Sudarshan firmness in 
his belief. One day he arrived at Sudarshan's hermitage disguised as a 
Brahmin. At that time he was not present in his hermitage. Dharmaraj refused 
to accept anything in donation except Sudarshan's wife herself. 
"Sudarshan's wife offered herself without any hesitation. When he returned, 
not finding her wife started calling her name. At that time he heard a voice 
saying that his wife was satisfying the lust of a guest. Sudarshan remained 
unperturbed and requested his guest to carry on till he is satisfied.”  
“Dharmaraj became pleased. He appeared before Sudarshan and gave 
blessings. He appreciated his hospitable nature by saying that by the virtue of 
his undiluted hospitality he had even vanquished him (Dharmaraj)." The sages 
were very ashamed of their conduct and returned Lord Brahma to explain as 
to how they could have devotion in Lord Shiva. Lord Brahma elucidated on the 
virtue of devotion and narrated the tale of sage Shwet who had subjugated 
even death by his devotion. 
SAGE SHWET  
The sages were very curious to know about sage Shwet. Lord Brahma narrated 
the following tale --- " 

977 
 



Once, there lived a sage named Shwet. He was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. 
He lived in a cave and engaged himself in severe penance, continuously 
chanting the holy name of Shiva. When the time of his death approached, 'Kal 
arrived there to take his life. Sage Shwet started eulogizing Lord Shiva. He 
challenged 'Kal' that being a devotee of Shiva he was beyond the reach of 
death. 
But, Kal made fun of him and told him that nobody could escape death. Sage 
Shwet had unshakable faith in Lord Shiva. Pointing towards the Shivalinga, he 
told Kal that he would remain unharmed because of Lord Shiva who was 
present in that Shivalinga. Suddenly, Kal tied him with his noose and said---
See, Now you are absolutely under my control and even your deity seems to 
be helpless. To protect his devotee, Lord Shiva arrived on the scene 
accomplished by Goddess Amba, Ganapati and Nandi. 'Kal' got scared to such 
an extent that he fainted and died." The sages curiously asked Lord Brahma 
about the means with which Shiva could be pleased. 
Lord Brahma told them that only deep devotion and nothing else could please 
Lord Shiva. 
SAGES EULOGIZE LORD SHIVA  
Having realized their mistake, the sages returned to Daruk forest and engaged 
themselves in austere penance to please Shiva. They did a tremendous 
penance, which lasted for a year. 
Ultimately their wished were fulfilled as Lord Shiva appeared with ashes 
smeared all over his body. He had a begging-bowl in his hands and exhibited 
strange mannerism. But this time the sages did not fail in recognizing him. 
They begged for his forgiveness and sought his blessings.Lord Shiva became 
pleased and blessed them divine sight, which made them enable to see his 
form of Trayambak. The illumined appearance of Lord Trayambak cast a 
spellbound over them. 
They eulogized Lord Shiva by singing praise in his name. This way, their deep 
devotion in Lord Shiva had exploited them from their sin. 

978 
 



LORD SHIVA PREACHES THE SAGES 
Lord Shiva revealed to the sages that a female sex organ was nothing but a 
symbolic expression of Goddess Parvati where as a male sex organ symbolized 
his own self. He also cautioned them against making fun of hermits 
appearance. He said- "These hermits who appear absured by their looks are 
my great devotees. They don't care about their physical appearance because I 
predominantly occupy their thoughts. Anybody making fun of these 'naked' 
hermits, whose bodies are smeared with ashes is in fact making fun of me." 
Lord Shiva then went on to describe the purity of ash and said---Ash is 
extremely pure, as it is the residual element of matter, which is left after 
burning. It is sacred and indestructible. This is why I smear it on my body. A 
person who smears ash on his body becomes liberated from all his sins. It is 
the destroyer of sin. It is the symbolic expression of my veerya (semen). This 
way Lord Shiva enlightened them on various spiritual topics. 
DADHICHI SUBJUGATES KSHOOPA  
There ruled a king named Kshoopa whose friend was Sage Dadhichi.  
Once they got into argument over the superiority of their respective castes. 
King Kshoopa was of the opinion that a Kshetriya was superior to Brahmin. 
Very soon, the dispute took an ugly turn and a duel broke out between them. 
Dadhich punched Kshoopa on his head. Kshoopa retaliated by attacking 
Dadhichi with his weapon named Vajra. The assault proved to be fatal for 
Dadhichi and he fell down. Before his death he prayed to his guru-
Shukracharya and sought his help. Realizing that his disciple was in danger, 
Shukracharya rushed to the spot, but Dadhichi had already died before he 
could arrive there. 
Shukracharya knew the secret learning, Mritasanjivani Vidya. He brought back 
Dadhichi alive and advised him to please Lord Shiva to attain invincibility. He 
also taught Dadhichi the proper methods of worshipping Shiva. Dadhichi did 
an austere penance and pleased Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva appeared and blessed 

979 
 



him with invincibility and also made his bones as hard as Indra's thunderbolt 
(Vajra). 
Dadhichi then went to fight Kshoopa. He kicked Kshoopa on his chest. 
Kshoopa retaliated by attacking Dadhichi with his Vajra. But this time Dadhichi 
remained unharmed. Kshoopa was surprised to see his assault going in vain. 
He decided to take the help of Lord Vishnu and engaged himself in austere 
penance. 
KSHOOPA ACCEPTS DEFEAT 
When Lord Vishnu appeared before Kshoopa, he sought his help in defeating 
Dadhichi. Lord Vishnu expressed his inability by saying--- I don't punish a 
Brahmin, especially if he is a devotee of Rudra. Dadhichi is both, so forget 
about defeating him. Anyhow, I will try me best to make Dadhichi devoid of 
his power. 
Lord Vishnu then went to Dadhichi's hermitage disguised as a Brahmin. 
Dadhichi recognized him and came to know about his intentions. He 
requested Lord Vishnu to go ahead with his demand. "I have conquered fear 
on account of my total devotion in Lord Shiva" said Dadhichi. 
Lord Vishnu did not like his arrogant behaviour. He said-"I know you have 
conquered fear. But, just for once, say that you are fearful of me, as I am 
Vishnu." But, Dadhichi refused to obey his commands. This infuriated Lord 
Vishnu and he tried to kill Dadhichi with his Chakra. Dadhichi remained 
unharmed and said- How can this Chakra harm me? Lord Shiva has given 
whose devotee I am it to you whose devotee I am. 
Lord Vishnu tried to use his other weapons but failed to cause any harm to 
Dadhichi. All the deities came to his help but still their efforts of defeating 
Dadhichi went futile. Lord Vishnu then tried to impress Dadhichi by his divine 
powers and showed his divine appearance in which the whole world was 
visible. Dadhichi gave a befitting reply by showing the whole universe 
including Lord Vishnu within his body. Lord Vishnu was amazed by his divine 
powers. 

980 
 



Ultimately, Lord Brahma persuaded Lord Vishnu to discontinue the fight. 
Seeing his Lord in such a helpless condition, Kshoopa had no other option but 
to accept defeat. He tried to pacify Dadhichi anger by asking cursed him as 
well as all the deities by saying--- All of you including the deities and Vishnu 
will be destroyed in Daksha's yagya as the consequence of Rudra's wrath. 
The place where Dadhichi's hermitage was situated later on became famously 
known as Sthaneshwar. It is considered to be the most sacred place of 
pilgrimage. 
SHILAD'S IMPOSSIBLE DEMAND  
Once, Shilad did an austere penance to please Indra. He was desirous of 
begetting a son. When Indra appeared he requested him to bless him with a 
son who was self-born as well as deathless. 
Indra expressed his helplessness in fulfilling impossible demand. Even Lord 
Brahma meets his end after the passage of crores of Kalpas"-said Indra. Shilad 
tried to convince the validity of his demand by citing the example of Daksha's 
son who according to his best of knowledge were self-born as well as 
deathless. Indra told him that it was not true. To prove his point Indra said- 
"Even Vishnu and Brahma are not self born. Lord Vishnu created Brahma 
during Meghavahan Kalpa. Some are of the view that Vishnu and Brahma 
manifested from the left and right sides of Shiva respectively. So, your 
demand is unsubstantial and without any base." According to a mythological 
tale Lord Vishnu manifested from in between the eyebrow of Lord Brahma. At 
that time Lord Shiva had arrived there to bless both of them. After the 
departure of Lord Shiva, Vishnu took the incarnation of Varaha (Boar) and 
reestablished the earth in its original position. Lord Brahma then commenced 
his creation and in course of time the earth came to be inhabitated by all kind 
of living creatures.PART THREE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF FOUR ERAS Shilad 
requested Indra to shed light on the special characteristics of each of the four 
eras. 

981 
 



Indra replied---Lord Brahma created the four eras (yugas)--Satya, Treta, 
Dwapar and Kali. These eras keep on occuring in a cyclic order where the 
former is followed by the latter. Satva guna (Pure) prevails during Satya Yuga. 
Rajas guna is the dominant quality prevailing during Treta Yuga. During 
Dwapar Yuga both Rajas guna and tamas guna are present. Tamas guna (Dark) 
is the dominant quality prevailing during Kali Yuga. During Satya Yuga, 
meditation was the means by the help of which a man could achieve salvation 
while oblation, devotion and donation were said to be the means capable of 
giving salvation during Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga and Kali Yuga respectively. 
The inhabitants of Satya Yuga were virtuous and free from sorrow. But the 
vice of desire started to raise its head during Treta Yuga and people started 
being troubled by it. Lord Brahma created the warrior caste Kshatriya for the 
protection of virtuosity. Brahma propogated the rituals of oblation during 
Treta Yuga. Everything was fine till Treta Yuga but there was a drastic change 
in the human behaviour during Dwapar Yuga. All the vices surfaced and 
people were troubled by them. Some extraordinary literary feats were 
accomplished during dwapar--Sage Vyasa categorized the veda into four 
sections, all the major Puranas were compiled and smritis were written. Kali 
Yuga saw the decline of virtuosity and religiousness. Ignorance and false 
knowledge prevailed everywhere during this era. 
KALI YUGA  
Describing about the decline in moral values during Kali Yuga, Indra told 
Shilad-- In Kali Yuga, people will be under the total influence of the worldly 
illusions. Ignorance diseases, fear and hunger will be prevalent everywhere. 
Famine and drought would occur quite frequently as the fall out of inadequate 
rain. Sinners would outnumber the virtuous people would Deviate from the 
path of religiousness. Brahmins would lose their superiority and Shudras 
would become the rulers. Brahmins will not be respected and will be forced to 
serve the lowlye people. Majority of women would be immoral and progenies 
would not obey the commands of their parents. 

982 
 



Predicting a grim scenario, Indra stressed great importance of religiousness 
during Kali Yuga and said-- A virtuous deed accomplished in Kali Yuga gives 
fruits in a day as compared to Treta and Dwapar Yugas, which take one year 
and one month respectively. 
MANIFESTATION OF BRAHMA  
Once, Lord Brahma did an austere penance to please Lord Shiva. Shiva 
manifestated as Ardhnarishwar (partly male partly female) from his forehead 
and said--'I am your son'. But, the unberabale heat emanating from the 
effulgence of Ardhanarishwar burnt the whole world including Lord 
Brahma.Lord Shiva then separated the feminine part of his body (Goddess 
Parmeshwari) and instructed her to begin creation. Both Brahma and Vishnu 
manifested from the body of Goddess Parmeshwari. Lord Vishnu divided his 
body into two halves and created the world. Lord Brahma once again did a 
tremendous penance which lasted for ten thousand years.  
Once again Shiva manifested from his forehead, but this time as Neelalohit. 
Lord Neela Lohit became pleased by Brahma's eulogy and blessed him. 
MANIFESTATION OF NANDISHWAR  
Shilad did a tremendous penance to please Lord Shiva. His penance continued 
for thousands of year. At last, Lord Shiva appeared before him and said--"I am 
extremely pleased by you devotion. I shall bless you with a son who will 
become famous for his knowledge and learning." But, Shilad was desirous of a 
self-born and immortal son. Lord Shiva said--'Your desire will be fulfilled. Even 
Lord Brahma had requested me to take an incarnation. I will take birth as your 
son and my name will be Nandi." In course of time, Shiva manifested from the 
oblation site. The deities became pleased after seeing Nandi, who possessed 
three eyes, four arms and a crown on his head. 
THE NETHER WORLD  
Lord Shiva is the source from where all the different worlds originate. People 
in their ignorance are unware of the fact that the whole universe is nothing 
but a medium through which Shiva manifests himself. The various worlds like 

983 
 



Maha, Jana, Tapa, Satya etc. and all the natural elements like earth, Sky ocean 
etc, owe their origin to Shiva. Underneath the earth lies the netherworlds 
which are all together seven in number-- Tala, Vitala, Sutala etc. The 
netherworld named Mahatala is the dwelling place of Lord Muchkand and 
king Bali. Sutala is yellow in colour while Vitalo shines brightly like a coral. 
Atala is of white colour and Tala has a shade of white. 
All these netherworld have the same expanse as the earth. Rasatal is the place 
where Vasuki resides. Talatal is the dwelling place of mighty demons like 
Virochan and Hiranyaksha. It is also the place where hell is situated. The 
netherworld named Sutal is the dwelling place where Tarka, Agnimukh and 
Prahlada live. Tala is the dwelling place of mighty warriors like Mahakumbh, 
Hayagreeva etc. 
THE SEVEN ISLANDS  
The earth consists of seven islands, many rivers, mountains and seven oceans. 
The Plaksha, Shalmali, Kush, Kraunch, Shak and Pushkar. Lord Shiva alongwith 
Goddess Ambika and his ganas dwell in all these seven islands in one form or 
the other. 
The name of the seven oceans are Ksharod, Rasod, Surod, Ghatodakshai, 
Dadhyarnav, Kshirod and Swadood. Lord Shiva manifests himself in all of 
them. Lord Shiva dwells in the ocean named Kshirarnav. King Priyavrata was 
the grandson of Manu, who ruled during Swayambhuva manvantar. He had 
ten sons-- Agnighra, Agnibahu, Meghatithi, Vasu, Vayushman. Jyotishman, 
Dyutiman, Havya, Savan etc. Priyavrata had made Aghnighra the king of 
Jambudweepa. 
Similarly the islands of Plakshadweepa, Shalmali, Kushadweepa, 
Kraunchdweepa, Shalvadweepa and Pushkar were given to Medhatithi, 
Vayushman, Jyotishman, Dyutiman Havya and Savan respectively. Havya had 
seven sons who became rulers and the different territories they ruled desired 
their names from them. 
BHARATA VARSH  

984 
 



Agnighra--the ruler of Jambudweepa was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. He 
had nine sons-- Nabhi, Kimpurusha, Harivarsha, Ilavrata, Ramaya, Hiranyaman, 
Kuru, Bhadrashva and Ketumal. 
Agnighra appointed Nabhi the king of Hemakhya. Similarly, Kimpurusha, 
Harivarsha, Ilavrata, Ramaya, Hiranyaman, Kuru, Bhadrashva and Ketumal 
were given the kingdoms of Hemakoot, Naishadh, Meru, Neelachal, Shwet, 
Sringavarsh, Malvan and Gandhamoodan respectively. After this, Agnighra 
renounced everything and went to do penance. 
Merudevi was Nabhi's wife and the mother of Rishabh. After growing up 
Rishabh got married and became the father of no less than one hundred sons. 
Among them Bharata was the eldest. 
When Bharata grow up, Rishabh appointed him as his successor and after 
renouncing everything went to the forest. 
Bharata went on to become a great king and ruled over the whole territory 
southwards of Himalaya. Our country derives its name from him. Bharata had 
a son named Sumati who succeeded his father as a king. 
THE MERU MOUNTAIN  
Meru mountain is situated in the heart of Jambudweepa. The Meru range is 
spread in the area of 16 thousand yojan. Its towering peak is 84 thousand in 
height from the ground level and had even penetrated the depth of earth to 
the measurement of 16 thousand yojan. Meru mountain is considered to be 
very sacred and is believed to be the dwelling place of the deities. 
Yamraj's abode--Vaivaswatipuri is situated in the souther part of Meru 
mountain. Some other holy places like Shuddhavati, Gandhavati and 
Yashomati are also situated on this mountain where Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu 
and Lord Shiva are believed to have their respective abodes. 
The sun continuously shines over Meru mountain. A river named Jambu flows 
down this mountain. There is also a tree by the same name which is eternally 
ladden with fruits. The Meru mountain is surrounded on all its sides by a 
country Ilavrita. The residents of Ilavrita relish the fruits of Jambu tree. 

985 
 



THE PROMINENT MOUNTAINS  
Describing about the physical characteristics os all tje seven islands, Suta says 
---"Seven mountains are situated in Plaksha dweepa- Gobhedak, Chandra, 
Narada, Dundubhi, Soyak, Sumana and Vaibhraj. Similarly, the prominent 
mountain ranges situated in Shalmali dweepa are Kumud, Uttam, Balahak, 
Drona, Karkamahish Kumudman etc. Kushadweepa also has seven mountains 
among which Vidhrabh and Hem are the prominent ones. All these seven 
islands are surrounded by seven oceans. The mountain named Lokalok is so 
gigantic in size that half of its part is always covered in darkness. 
The omnipresent Lord Shiva pervades the whole universe.  
Once, being confronted by the effulgence of Lord Shiva, who had disguised 
himself as a Yaksha, all the deities became devoid of their power. Indra was 
amazed and asked the Yaksha as to who he was. Lord Shiva disappeared 
without giving any answer and Goddess Ambika appeared before the deities. 
Indra asked her the same question to which Goddess Ambika replied--- He 
was none other than the almighty Shiva. I being the Prakriti (nature) do 
creation following his instructions. He is the embodiment of Purusha 
(Supreme almighty). 
THE SUN  
The movement of Sun is rapid when it is positioned south of equator 
(Dakshainayan), on the other hand its movement is slow when positioned 
north os equator (Uttarayan).The time is indicated by the various positions of 
Sun while it is on its course of movement in the horizon. 
While the sun is situated in the South-East direction it is believed to be the 
morning time. 
Similarlt, when the Sun has positioned itself in the south-west, North-west or 
South-East direction, it is said to be the 'before-noon', 'after-noon' and Night 
respectively. 
The Sun is believed to be mounted on a chariot while on its course of 
movement in the Horizon. 

986 
 



All the deities, apsaras and Gandharvas are believed to follow its movement. 
The periods of day and night consist of 30 ghadi each. The Sun causes rainfall 
due to the process of evaporation. 
Water is the source of life and is the manifestation of Lord Shiva himself. 
LORD BRAHMA ASSIGNS LORDSHIPS TO THE DEITIES  
The Sages requested Suta to describe how Lord Brahma assigned Lordships to 
all the deities and the demons. 
Suta replied--- The Sun was made the Lord of all the planets. Soma was made 
the Lord of all the constellations and medicinal herbs. Similarly, Vaun was 
made the Lord of water, while Kubera was assigned the Lordship of wealth. 
Lord Vishnu attained the Lordship of Adityas, Pawak of Vasus, Daksha of 
Prajapatis, Indra of deities, and Prahlada attained the Lordship of all the 
demons. Some other prominent species and the assigned Lordships are as 
follows--- SPECIES LORD SPECIES LORDAnimals Rudra Women Uma Rudras 
Neelalohit Obstacles Gajanan Power of Speech Saraswati Mountains Himalaya 
Rivers Ganga Oceans Ksheersagar Trees Peepal (Fig) Gandharvas Chitrarathi 
Serpents Takshak Birds Garuda Prithu was made the Lord of Earth and Lord 
Shiva the Lord of whole universe. 
THE CHARIOTS OF SUN MOON AND OTHER PLANETS  
The chariot of Surya is believed to have been created by Lord Brahma. It is 
made up of gold and its wheels have five spokeseach. The chariot is very huge 
in size and its expanse covers the area of nine thousand yojan. It is pulled by 
seven horses which are of green complexion. The movement of Sun results 
into the occurence of day and night. The moon's chariot consists of three 
wheela and is pulled by ten white horses. Each wheel is supported by one 
hundred spokes. 
The chariots of Mercury, Mars and Jupiter are believed to be pulled by eight 
horses each. The chariot of Saturn is believed to be pulled by ten black horses. 
THE RADIANCE OF SURYA  

987 
 



The Surya is the source to which all the living beings owe their existence. All 
the deities derive their effulgence from Surya, who in turn derives its own 
radiance from Lord Mahadeva.Time is determined with the help of Surya's 
movement. One can not even imagine the various units of time, like Kshana, 
muhurta day, night, fortnight, month, season etc. without the existence of 
Surya. The Sun, which illuminates the whole world is nothing but the medium 
through which the almighty Rudra manifests himself. The Sun sheds 
thousands of rays among which seven are prominent- Sushumna, Rishikesh, 
Vishwakarma, Vishwatyacha, Annadh, Sarvavasu and Swarah. 
 
PART FOUR  
DHRUVA -- THE SUPREME DEVOTEE  
The Sages asked Suta as to how Dhruva became successful in attaining 
immortality and supreme status among all the stars. Suta narrated the 
following tale--- There lived a king named Uttanpad, who had two queens--
Suniti and Suruchi. The eldest queen Suniti had a son named Dhruva. One day 
while Dhruva was sitting in his father's lap, Suruchi-- his step mother, 
contemptuously pulled him from Uttanpad's lap and made her own son sit in 
his place. Dhruva went to Suniti and complained about his steps mother's 
behaviour. Suniti advised Dhruva that he should seek for the supreme status, 
which is permanent. Following his mother's advice, Dhruva went to the forest 
in search of that supreme status. In the forest, he met Sage Vishwamitra who 
advised him to seek the blessings of Lord Keshav by chanting the sacred 
mantra Om Namo Vasudevay. Dhruva did an austere penance for thousands 
of year. At last, Lord Vishnu became pleased and appeared before him 
mounted on Garuda. Vishnu touched Dhruva's face with his conch as a result 
of which he attained Self knowledge. Vishnu blessed Dhruva by saying ---I give 
you the supreme place, which even the deities and the sages long for. This 
way Dhruva attained a supreme status among all the stars with the blessings 
of Vishnu. 

988 
 



THE ORIGIN OF DEITIES  
On being enquired by the sages about the origin of deities, demons and other 
celestial entities, Suta said-- Daksha being desirous of enhancing the 
population, created ten-thousand sons merely by his wish and instructed 
them to contribute in the propagation of population. His objective remained 
unfulfilled as Narada was successful in preaching them towards the path of 
devotion. 
As a result all of them went to do meditation after renouncing the world. 
Seeing his efforts go in vain, Daksha created ten thousand more sons who 
were convinced by Narada to the path of renunciation once again. Daksha 
then begot sixty daughters from his wife named Vairini. When these girls grew 
up, Daksha married to different sages--ten of them were married to Dharma, 
thirteen to Kashyapa, twenty-seven to Soma, four to Arishtanemi, two to 
Bhrigu's son, two to Krishashwa and the remaining two were married to 
Angira. 
The named of Dharma's wives were Marutivati, Vasu, Aryama, Lamba, Bhanu, 
Arundhati, Sankalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya and Vishwabhamini. Vishwabhamini 
was the mother of Vishvedeva, while Sadhya gave birth to Sadhva. Similarly, 
Marutvati, Bhanu, Muhurta, Lamba and Sankalpa gave birth to Varutwan, 
Bhanav, Mahurtik Ghosh and Sankalpa respectively. Vasu became the mother 
of eight Vasus. 
Among the twenty seven wives of Kashyapa the names of some prominent 
ones were--Aditi, Diti, Arishta, Surasa, Muni, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodha, 
Vasha, Ila, Kadru, Twishad, Anga etc.Kashyapa had two sons from Diti, 
Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha. Danu gave birth to one hundred sons among 
whom Viprachit was very prominent. Tamra gave birth to six daughters--- 
Shuki, Sweni, Sugreevi, Gridhika, Bhasi and Shuni. 
Kashyapa did an austere penance and was blessed with two sons--Vatsar and 
Asit, Vatsar had two sons--Naibudh and Raimbh. Asit married Ekparna and had 
one son from her-- Brahmanishth.Vashishtha was married to Arundhati and 

989 
 



had one hundred sons from her among whom Shakti was the eldest. Shakti 
was married to Adrishyanti and Parashar was his son. 
Dwaipayan was the son of Parashar and Shukra was Dwaipayan's son. 
SAGE PARASHAR  
The Sages asked Suta how Shakti had been devoured by a demon named 
Rudhir.Sutiji replied---  
Once, Sage Vashishtha was presiding over a grand Yagya being organized by a 
king named Kalmashpad. Vashishtha had a rivalry with Vishwamitra. On seeing 
Vashishtha busy in that Yagya, Vishwamitra instigated Rudhir-- a demon, to kill 
his sons. Rudhir followed the instructions and devoured Vashishtha's sons 
including Shakti. 
When Vashishtha learnt about his sons death his heart was filled with grief. He 
desired to give up his life but was prevented from doing so by his daughter-in-
law. She informed him about her pregnancy and said-- Very soon you will see 
your grandson. So, quit the idea of giving up your life. Vashishtha, though still 
mournful of his son's death, postponed the idea of giving up his life for the 
time being. One day while he was engrossed in the thoughts of his departed 
son, he was amazed to listen the recital of a vedic hymn. He looked all around 
but found nobody. Suddenly he heard a heavenly voice that revealed by his 
grandson who was still inside the womb of his mother. In course of time, 
Arundhati gave birth to a son who was named Parashar. One day young 
Parashar curiously enquired from his mother as to why she did not put on 
ornaments like other women of her age do. Arundhati kept quite but when 
Parashar kept on insisting she revealed to him that it was not proper for a 
mournful women to adorn herself. She also told him how his father--Shakti 
had been killed by Rudhir, the demon. 
Parashar consoled Arundhati by saying that he would avenge his father's Lord 
Shiva. He then made an earthen Shivalinga and started worshipping it by 
chanting the scared mantras of ShivaSukta and trayambak Sukta. Lord Shiva 
became pleased by his devotion and blessed him with a divine vision which 

990 
 



enabled him to see his dead father. Parashar then commenced a yagya with 
the purpose of annihilating the demons. All the demons started being 
tormented by the extreme heat generated by that oblation. Vashishtha 
prevented by that oblation. Vashishtha prevented Parashar from contiuing 
with that Yagya as many innocent demons had suffered. Parashar stopped 
performing the rituals at his father's request. 
Sage Pulastya had also been invited in that yagya. He was very pleased by his 
devotion toward his father and blessed him with the knowledge of all the 
scriptures. In course of time, Parashar became famous for his treatise--Vishnu 
Purana. 
THE LINEAGE OF ADITYA  
On being enquired by the Sages about the respective lineage of Aditya (Sun) 
and Soma (moon) Suta replied--- Sage Kashyapa had a son--Aditya, from Aditi. 
Aditya had four wives--Sangya, Rajyi, Prabha and Chhaya. Sangya gave birth to 
Manu whereas Ragyi was the mother of Yama, Yamuna and Raivat. Prabha 
gave birth to Prabhat while chhaya was the mother of three children--Savarni, 
Shani, Tapti and Vrishti. 
Chhaya was extremely affectionate towards her step son-- Yama. One day 
Yama kicked her in anger as a result of which his leg became inflicted with 
incurable disease. He became cured of his disease only after doing penance 
for thousands of years at as place called Gokarna.Manu had nine sons--- 
Ikshavaku, Nabhag, Dhrishnu, Sharyati, Narishyant, Nabhag, Arisht, Karush 
and Prishaghna. He also had three daughters--Ila, Jyeshtha and Varishtha who 
coincidentally attained male physique later on in their life. Ila became famous 
as Sudyumna and had three sons-- Utkal, Gopa and Vinitashva. Harishwa was 
the descendant of Ikshavaku and had a son named Vasumana. Tridhanva was 
Vasumana's son. He had attained the designation of 'Ganapatya' by virtue of 
accomplishing one thousand Ashwamedha Yaga. Tridhanva had a son named 
Trayyarun and the name of his son was Satyavrata. The same Satyavrata 
became famous as Trishanku, who was the only person to attain to heaven 
with his mortal body. 

991 
 



The most truthful king Harish Chandra was the son if Trishanku. Harish 
chandra had a son named Rohit. Sagar belonged to the lineage of 
Harishchandra. He had two wives-- Prabha had given birth to sixty thousand 
sons but Bhanumati had only one son named Asamanjas.Anshuman was the 
son on Asamanjas. Anshuman's son was Dilip. Sage Bhagirath was the son of 
Dilip. 
Some prominent personality who belonged to the lineage of Ikshavaku were 
Shrut, Nabhag, Ambarish, Dirghabahu, Dilip (Dirghabahu's son), Raghu, Aja, 
Dasharath, Rama, Lakshman, Bharata, Shatrughna, Lav and Kush. The famous 
king Pururava also cause from the same lineage. He was a great devotee of 
Lord Shiva. His son was Nahush. Nahush had six sons among whom Yayati was 
the eldest. Yayati had two wives--- Devayani and Sharmishtha. Yayati ruled 
over the whole earth. He had conquered the whole earth with the help of 
divine weapons and chariot which he had received from his father in law--
Shukracharya (Devayani's father). 
Yayati had two sons from Devayani-- Yadu and Turvasu. He also had three 
sons from his second wife--Sharmishtha whose names were Drushya, Anu and 
Puru.Yayati appointed his youngest son Puru as his successor because of his 
total devotion towards his parent. Yadu was made the ruler of Southern 
province. 
YADU DYNASTY  
Yadu had five sons among whom Sahastrajeet was the eldest. Shatarjay was 
the oson of Sahastrajeet and himself had three sons--Haihya, Haya and Venu. 
Dharma was Haihya's son. 
Dharmanetra was the son of Dharma and himself had two sons--Kirti and 
Sanjay.Sanjay's son was Mahishman and Bhadrashrenya was Mahishman's 
son. Durdam was the son of Bhadrashrenya and Durdam's son was Dhanak. 
Dhanak had four sons among whom the youngest --Kartaveerya Arjuna was 
very mighty. He was killed by Parashuran. Kartaveerya Arjuna had many sons 
among whom Shoor, Shoorsen, Dhrishta, Krishna and Jayadhuraja were 

992 
 



prominent. Jayadhwaja had a very mighty son named Talajangha. Talajangha 
too had many mighty and brave sons like Veetihotra, Vrisha eetc. Vrisha had a 
son-- Madhu. Madhu's son was Vrishni. 
Some other prominent kings of Yadu dynasty were--Praghrajit, Jyamagh, 
Shrut, Vidarbh, Subhag, Vayu, Kratha, Kaushik, Romapad, Vabhru, Sughriti, 
Kunta, Ranadhrista, Bhimarath, Navarath, Dhridharath, Karambha, Devaratha, 
Devakshatrak and Madhu. The famous Kaurava dynasty came from the lineage 
of Madhu. 
SRI KRISHNA  
Ahuka came from the lineage of Yadu. He had two sons-- Devak and Ugrasen. 
The eldest son, Devak had eleven children--four sons and seven daughters. 
The names of his sons were-- Devavan, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devarakshit. All 
his seven daughters, which also included Devaki were married to Vasudeva. 
Ahuk's youngest son, Ugrasen had nice sons among Kansa was the eldest. 
Vasudeva had a son named Balarama from Rohini. Devaki, one of his wives 
gave birth of Lord Sri Krishna. Vasudeva had exchanged Sri Krishna with the 
daughter of Yashoda as Sri Krishna's life was under threat from Kansa. When 
Kansa tried to kill her, She slipped away from her hand and ascended towards 
the sky. She then thundered. ''There is no use killing me. The person who is 
supposed to kill you has already taken birth'. Her prophesy came to be truth 
and Kansa was ultimately killed by Sri Krishna. 
Sri Krishna had 16108 Queens among whom Rukmini was dearest. He did an 
austere penance to please Lord Shiva as the result of which He was blessed 
with many sons like Charudeshna, Sucharu, Pradyumna etc. He also had a son 
named Samb from Jambawati. Lord Krishna left for heavenly abode after 
enjoying a long life of 120 years. He had destroyed His whole clan before 
leaving His mortal body. A hunter named Jara who mistook him to be a deer 
killed him. Due to the curse of Ashtavakra, Sri Krishna's wives had been 
abducted by the dacoits. 
LORD BRAHMA BLESSES THE DEMONS  

993 
 



The Sages asked Suta as to how did Maya--The demon acquire three well 
fortified forts from Lord Brahma and how was Lord Shiva finally successful in 
destroying them. 
Suta replied-- After Tarakasur's death his three sons, Vidyunmali, Kamlaksha 
and Tarakaksha did tremendous penance to please Lord Brahma. When Lord 
Brahma appeared. They expressed their desire of attaining immortality. Lord 
Brahma refused to oblige them. The demons after consulting each other 
demanded three invincible forts from him and said 'Only such a person should 
be able to kill us, who is capable of destroying all the three forts with a single 
shot of an arrow.' Lord Brahma blessed them and disappeared. Maya, then did 
an austere penance and with the help of divine powers attained from it, 
constructed three forts at three different places. The fort made of gold was 
situated in the heaven, while the silver-fort was situated in the space. The 
third fort, which was made of iron, was situated on the earth. The gold-fort 
was given to Tarakaksha, the silver-fort to Kamalaksha and the iron-fort was 
given to Vidyunmali. After acquiring these invincible forts all the demons had 
become extremely arrogant. They started tormenting the deities. 
The deities went to Lord Vishnu and requested help. Lord Vishnu created 
thousands of spirits (Bhootganas) and instructed them to destroy those three 
forts. But, the Bhootganas were unsuccessful in their attempt and were 
charred to death. Lamenting their death the deities went to Lord Vishnu and 
sought help once again. Lord Vishnu was aware that the demons derived their 
power from Lord Shiva. So, He decided to Deviate them from the path of 
Shiva's devotion. He then created an illusionary entity. The illusionary entity 
went to the place where demons lived and was successful in influencing them 
by his illusionary tactics. 
All the demons became so impressed by him that they stopped worshipping 
Lord Shiva and became His disciples. This resulted into a total degradation of 
moral values among the demons. 
Finding the time opportune, Lord Vishnu eulogized Shiva who appeared and 
agreed to destroy those three forts. Vishwakarma made a divine chariot for 

994 
 



Lord Shiva and Lord Brahma became the charioteer. Mounted on that chariot, 
Lord Shiva proceeded towards the demon. All the deities followed him. 
Lord Brahma said---'Right now it is Pushya yoga and it is very auspicious for 
launching and it is very auspicious for launching an attack on the demon's 
forts.'Lord Shiva then released his arrow, which after destroying all the three 
forts returned to his quiver. The deities became pleased and eulogized Lord 
Shiva. 
APPOINTMENT OF ANDHAK AS THE LORD OF GANAS  
On being asked by the Sages how Andhak--the demon was appointed as the 
Lord of Ganas by Lord Shiva, Suta narrated the following tale to them.--The 
mighty demon, Andhak was Hiranyaksh's son. By the virtue of his austere 
penance he had received a boon of immortality from Lord Brahma. In course 
of time he conquered all the three worlds. He started tormenting the deities 
and as a result of which they had to take refuge in the causes of Mandarachal 
mountain. 
The deities went to Lord Shiva and narrated their woeful tale to him. They also 
requested him to kill Andhak so that they could live in peace. Lord Shiva went 
to the place where Andhak lived accompanied by all the deities. When Andhak 
saw them coming, he attacked menacingly with his various weapons. The 
deities became scared and started running helter-skelter. Lord Shiva then 
killed Andhak with his trident. He then lifted the corpse with the help of his 
trident and kept in that position for a very long period. 
The divine sight of Lord Shiva had liberated Andhak from all his sins. Finding 
himself in a helpless position, Andhak eulogized Shiva and begged for 
forgiveness. At last, Lord Shiva became pleased and brought Andhak down 
after lowering his trident. He gave him the designation of a Ganapati and 
made him the Lord of his ganas. 
THE LIBERATION OF EARTH  
The Sages were curious to know how Lord Vishnu in his incarnation of Varaha 
(Boar), had liberated the earth from the captivity of Hiranyaksha. They also 

995 
 



wanted to know why Lord Shiva adorned himself with the horn of that boar. 
Suta narrated the following tale--- Hiranyaksha--Andhak's father was a tyrant. 
After Vanquishing the deities, he had taken the earth to 'Rasatala'. The deities 
sought the help of Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu then took the incarnation of 
Varaha (boar) and killed Hiranyaksha with his sharp horns. 
He then brought the earth from Rasatala and kept it in its original position. 
The deities eulogized both Lord Vishnu and mother earth. Lord Shiva adorned 
and himself with the ornament carved out from the horn of that boar. This is 
the reason why he is also called 'Danshtri' (wild boar). 
KILLING OF JALANDHAR  
The Sages requested Suta to reveal how Lord Shiva had killed the notorious 
demon-- Jalandhar. 
Suta narrated the following tale--- There was a demon named Jalandhar. He 
had manifested from the ocean. He had acquired divine power by the virtue of 
his austere penance. Jalandhar had defeated the deities and conquered the 
heaven. He even defeated Lord Vishnu and boasted---'I have conquered 
everybody. Now! Only Shiva is lift to be conquered.' Jalandhar went to fight a 
battle with Lord Shiva accompanied by a huge army. Lord Shiva was aware of 
the boon, which Lord Brahma had given to Andhak and which had made him 
invincible. Jalandhar derived his power from his wife- Vrinda who was an 
extremely chaste woman. As per the plans of the deities, Lord Vishnu 
disguised as Jalandhar and went to breach the modesty of Vrinda. Vrinda 
could not recognize Lord Vishnu and mistook him to be her husband--
Jalandhar. Ultimately, Lord Vishnu was successful in his motives. 
Meanwhile, the battle had commenced between Jalandhar and Lord Shiva. 
Lord Shiva destroyed the whole army of Jalandhar by the sight of his third eye. 
Jalandhar became furious and tried to kill Lord Shiva with the Sudarshan 
Chakra, which he had snatched from Vishnu. Butas soon as he lifted the 
Sudarshan chakra, his body got cut into two parts. The death of Jalandhar 
brought immense joy to the deities. 

996 
 



THE ORIGIN OF LORD GANESH  
Once, the deities requested Lord Shiva to Device some means so that they no 
longer had to live under the threat of the demons.The most merciful Lord 
Pinaki Shiva then took the incarnation of Ganeshwar. He had a human body 
but his heard resembled like an elephant. He held a trident in his hand. All the 
deities eulogized Lord Ganesh--the Lord of wisdom and the remover of all 
obstacles. Lord Ganesh is the first deity to be worshipped in any ritual as he is 
believed to remove all the obstacles. A devotee of Lord Ganesh is free from 
the fear of failures and achieves success in any endeavour he undertakes. 
SHIV TANDAV  
The deities were curious to know the story behind 'Tandav'- the famous dance 
of Lord Shiva. So, they asked Suta how it started and what made Shiva to 
perform Tandav.Suta replied--- There lived a demon named Daruk. He had 
acquired divine powers by the virtue of his austere penance. He started 
tormenting the deities, sages and all the virtuous people. All the deities went 
to Lord Shiva and requested him to give protection from the tyrany of Daruk. 
Lord Shiva then requested Parvati to help the deities. One part of Parvati's 
consciousness entered into the body of Lord Shiva. But, the deities were not 
aware of this happening. Goddess Parvati then attained her physical form with 
the help of poison stored in the throat of Lord Shiva. The effet of poison had 
made her complexion dark. Lord Shiva then brought her out from within his 
body through his third eye. 
The deities became frightened after seeing her terrific appearance. She was 
none other than Goddess Kali. Goddess Kali then killed Daruk with the 
permission of Parvati.But, even after the death of Daruk, her anger did not 
subside and the whole world was ablaze due to her anger. Lord Shiva then 
incarnated as a small child and started crying as if he was hungry. Goddess Kali 
could not decipher the illusions of Shiva and thought that the child was crying 
because of hunger. She started feeding the child her breast-milk. In the 
process of sucking milk, Shiva also sucked out her anger. 

997 
 



The extreme anger of Kali had resulted into the manifestation of eight divine 
entities who became famous as 'Kshetrapal. After her anger had subsided 
Goddess Kali became unconscious. 
Lord Shiva then performed his famous dance--Tandav for the first time to 
bring Kali back to consciousness. He was accompanied by all the ghosts and 
spirits in his terrific dance. When Kali regained her consciousness she found 
Shiva dancing. She too started dancing and this is the reason why she is also 
called Yogini. 
 
PART FIVE  
UPAMANYU  
The sages were curious to know how Lord Shiva had bestowed the designation 
of Ganpatya and an ocean of milk to Upamanyu. They requested Suta to shed 
light on the two incidents. 
Suta narrated the following tale --- Upamanyu was a brilliant child. There is an 
interesting story how he became the supreme devotee of Lord Shiva.  
Once, during his childhood he had gone to his maternal-uncle's place. 
One day, while he was hungry he tried to drink some milk. But his cousin did 
not allow him to drink milk and after snatching the bowl of milk drank himself. 
Upamanyu started crying. He went to his mother who tried to console him by 
giving a solution of powdered grains. But, Upamanyu did not want anything 
less than milk. His mother said--'You should be satisfied with whatever you 
get. Perhaps we did not worship Lord Shiva in our past lives. Our hardships are 
the fallouts of those unpardonable sins. Only a devotee of Shiva is entitled to 
all kinds of comfort and pleasure.' Upamanyu decided then and there to 
please Shiva by his penance and attain an ocean of milk from him. He went to 
Himalaya mountain and started doing an austere penance. His penance had 
resulted into the generation of unbearable heat. The deities became terrified 
and went to seek the help of Lord Vishnu.Lord Vishnu along with the deities 

998 
 



went to Lord Shiva and sought his help. Lord Shiva decided to test the 
devotion of Upamanyu. He disguised himself as Indra and went to the place 
where Upamanyu was doing penance. He started abusing Shiva which made 
Upamanyu so angry that he tried to kill him. When Upamanyu failed in his 
attempt to kill Shiva, he tried to kill himself by chanting 'Agneya mantra'. 
Lord Shiva was very pleased by his total devotion and revealed his identity. He 
blessed Upamanyu and after accepting him as his son granted the designation 
of Ganpatya. He also provided oceans of milk and curd to Upamanyu. 
THE GREATNESS OF DWADASHAKSHAR MANTRA  
On being asked by the sages about the sacred mantra-- the chanting of which 
enabled a man to attain salvation Suta replied --- Lord Vishnu gives salvation 
to those people who endeavour to seek Brahm-- the Almighty God. 
A man whose mind is preoccupied with the thought of Lord Vishnu and 
nothing else is entitled to attain Salvation. Such a man is also blessed by 
Goddess Lakshmi." Describing about the greatness of Dwadakshar mantra, 
Suta said --''The sacred mantra consists of twelve letters 'OM NAMO 
BHAGAVATE VASUDE VAY'. 
This powerful mantra helps a man to achieve proximity with Lord Vishnu.' 
Once there lived a Brahmin who used to stammer while talking. All his efforts 
of making him speak distinctly went in vain as the child continued to lisp. 
When the Brahmin tried to teach his son. the dwadakshar mantra, he 
incorrectly pronounced 'Vasudev as 'Etareva'. So the child was given the name 
'Etareva'. The Brahmin became disgusted and married a second time. He had 
many sons from his second wife, all of whom were very studious. 
Etareva's mother used to curse her fate because of his habit of stammering. 
One day she said-- 'Look! I am no more able to tolerate the humiliation of 
being a mother of a dull child--Look at your step-brothers, who have achieved 
fame and respect on account of their learning. I have decided to give up my 
life.' Etareva became very sad. He started chanting the dwadashakshar mantra 

999 
 



regularly and as a result a day came, when he could pronounce it correctly 
and without stammering. 
One day Etareva happened to pass by a place where a yagya was being 
performed. As soon as he reached that place, the priests found to their 
surprise that they had become dumb. All the priests became restless, as the 
rituals were still incomplete. Looking at their pitiable condition, Etareva 
chanted the dwadakshar mantra-- OM NAMO BHAGAVATE VASUDEVAY. The 
priest regained their power of speech by the virtue of the flawless 
pronunciation of the mantra. Such is the greatness of dwadakshar mantra. 
Later on, Etareva went on to become a renowned scholar. A person who 
chants this sacred mantra regularly become liberated from all his sins and 
attains to Vishnu Lok.SHADAKSHAR MANTRA Describing about the greatness 
of Shadakshar mantra that consists of six letters, Suta said-- The sacred 
mantra -- OM NAMAH SHIVAY holds a supreme place among all the mantras. 
During the Meghavahan kalpa of the first Treta Yuga, there lived a Brahmin 
named Dhoondhmook. He became a licentious person due to the curse of a 
sage. As a result he became a man of loose moral conduct. His wife gave birth 
to a child on the inauspicious day of Amavasya. The astrologers predicted a 
very bleak future for that new born child. 
When the child grew up he became notorious for his sinful conduct. 
Dhoondhmook married his son in a respectable family but his son being a man 
of loose character, developed intimacy with a woman belonging to a low 
caste. One day, Dhoondhmook that son developed sharp differences with that 
woman on some matter and in a fit of range killed her. When the family 
members of that woman came to know about her death, they retaliated by 
killing Dhoondhmook his wife and his daughter-in-law. Since Dhoondhmook's 
son was not present in the house at that time he survived. He avenged the 
death of his family members by killing the assasins. Now Dhoondhmook's son 
had become disillusioned with life. He started wandering aimlessly and 
reached a hermitage. The sage who lived in that hermitage was a great 

1000 
 



devotee of Lord Shiva and taught him the rituals of Pashupat Vrata as well as 
the sacred Shodakshar mantra. 
Dhoondhmook's son performed the rituals of Pashupat Vrat for twelve 
months. All the while he kept on chanting the Shadakshar mantra. As the 
result of his devotion towards Lord Shiva and by the virtue of chanting 
Sadakshar mantra he as well as all his ancestors attained salvation. 
LORD PASHUPATI  
The sages were curious to know why Lord Shiva was also known as Pashupati 
(lord of animals). 
Suta retold the same tale which sage Shiladi had once narrated to Sanatkumar 
--  
Once, Sanatkumar went to the hermitage of Sage Shiladi and asked him as to 
why was Lord Shankar also known as Pashupati. He also inquired about the 
reason of man's ondages and how could he be liberated from them. 
Sage Shiladi replied---All the living beings including Lord Brahma have been 
referred to animals because of their attachment to worldly desires and 
ignorance. Lord Shiva being the Lord of them is also known as Pashupati. It is 
none other than Lord Vishnu whose illusionary and divine powers keep them 
in bondages. It is also only Lord Vishnu who liberates them by bestowing the 
knowledge of Jnana Yoga. 
Nobody can attain salvation without the blessings of Lord Shiva. The nothing 
but the 24 elements--10 sense organs, 4 type of consciousness, 5 basic 
elements from which matter is made and 5 subtle forms of matter. A person 
who worships Lord Shiva with total devotion becomes liberated because 
devotion is capable of destroying all types of sins. 
THE MAJESTIC LORD MAHESHWAR 
Lord Maheshwar is beyond the reach if any kind of bondage. He is totally 
liberated entity. It is only by his blessings that the Nature-Prakriti, creates 
intelligence--buddhi. Similarly, intelligence creates ego-ahamkara and subtle 

1001 
 



forms of matter--tanmatra creates the greatest of matter by the blessings of 
Lord Shiva. No word can describe the greatness of Lord Shiva.It is only with 
the permission of Lord Maheshwar that our sense organs function the fire 
burns and all the living beings fulfill their respective duties. Lord Shiva is the 
Almighty God and Goddess Parvati is also called Shiva. He is the Purusha and 
she is the nature or Prakriti. The matter derives its power from Goddess Gauri. 
Everything that is capable of creating is nothing but the form of Uma. The 
whole universe is established in the form of Shivalinga and hence everybody 
must worship Lord Shiva. 
THE SUN - MANIFESTATION OF SHIVA'S POWER  
Lord Shiva manifests himself in the form of Sun. The Sun radiates twelve 
different types of rays which have specific impacts and influences on the 
world. 
The first ray is called Amrit and the deities derive their power from it. The 
second ray is called Chandra and it helps in the preservation of medicinal 
herbs. The third ray is called Shukla and it helps in the propagation of 
religiousness in the world. It also helps the food crops to become ripe. The 
fourth ray is Harikesha and all the constellations get their nourishment from it. 
The fifth ray is called Vishwakarma and it gives the planet mercury. 
The sixth ray is called Sanyadwasu and it nurtures the planet--Mars. The 
seventh ray is called Arvavasu and it nurtures the planet Jupiter. The eighth 
ray is called Surat and it nurtures the planet --Saturn. The nineth ray is called 
Susumana and it nutures the moon. 
SHIVA TATTVA  
The learned and sages call Shiva by many names ---Kshetragya, Prakriti Vyakta, 
Kalatma etc. 
The synonyms of Kshetragya and Prakriti are Purusha and Pradhan 
respectively.The delusionary net of the Prakriti is known as Vyakta (apparent). 
Kala (time) is the resultant by product of Pradhan and Vyakta. Some sages call 
Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) as the Purusha and Shiva as Pradhan. They consider 

1002 
 



Hiranyagarbha to be the creator and Purusha to be the enjoyer. Even these 
sages are of the opinion that Hiranyagarbho, Pradhan, Purusha and enjoyer 
are the manifestations of Shiva. 
THE GREATNESS OF SHIVA  
The almighty Shiva manifested in the form of Sthanu (Pillar) from his 
imperceptible form and looked at Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma then 
commenced his creation and established the norms of Varna ashrama. He also 
created 'Soma' which is required for the performance of 'Yagya'. This world, 
including all the deities are the embodiments of Soma. The deities eulogize 
Lord Shiva by chanting the mantras of 'Rudrashtadhyay'. 
Once, Lord Shiva was sitting surrounded by all the deities. On being requested 
by the deities to shed light on his mysterious self, Lord Shiva said--- "I was 
present before the beginning of time and I will be present forever. Everything 
originate from me and get submerged in me ultimately. I am the Lord of 
Brahma. I am the truth itself. I manifest myself in the forms of Rigveda, 
Samaveda, Yajurveda and Atharvaveda. I am the light as well as the darkness. I 
am Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh. One who is aware of my omnipresence is the 
only person who is worthy of being called an enlightened one." This way, after 
enlightening the deities on his myssterious self Lord Shiva disappeared. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF GURU  
A devotee should commence the worship of Lord Shiva only after taking 
permission from his Guru, Only such a person is worthy of being called a Guru 
who is virtuous and well versed in the scripture. 
A disciple should unwavering by be in the service of his Guru and should try to 
please him by his devotion because only he (Guru) is capable of liberating him 
from the miseries of world. A guru should try to test the worthiness of his 
disciple by employing different means for three years.  
Once, the Guru has accepted a person as his disciple, he should try to impart 
all the knowledge to him. He should never discriminate on the basic of caste 

1003 
 



or creed of a disciple. It is the duty of a Guru to make his disciple destitute of 
flaws and shortcomings. 
THE RITUALS OF INITIATION  
Before commencing the rituals of initiation, the Guru should purify the place 
where the rites are supposed to be performed. He should make an attar and 
draw an eight-petalled lotus at its center. 
He should then establish the various embodiments of Shiva like Aghor, Pranav, 
Vamadeva, on each of the eight petals. The Guru should then purify all the 
directions by chanting different mantras. He should then meditate on the 
form of Lord Shiva. After that he should make offerings in the sacrificial fire 
and purify himself by doing achaman. He should then have Panchagavya as 
prasadam and smear ashes on his body. 
The Guru should instructed his old disciples to sit towards the south of altar. 
He should make offerings of ghee into the sacrificial fire for 108 times amidst 
the chanting of Aghor mantra .The new disciple then arrive blindfolded and 
circumambulate the sacrificial altar for three times. 
While circumambulating everybody should chant either the mantras of 
Rudrashtadhyay or Omkar mantra. The new disciple then smear ashes on their 
bodies amidst the chanting of Aghor mantra. The Guru then sprinkles holy 
water on the new disciples. In the end the disciple takes a religious vow. "I 
shall never have food without worshipping Shiva". This way the ritual of 
initiation comes to an end. 
INSTALLATION OF SHIVALINGA 
Describing about the methods of installing a Shivalinga Suta says-- A devotee 
should install a Shivalinga made of either gold, silver or copper. The shivalinga 
should be installed along with the altar. The altar of the Shivalinga symbolizes 
Goddess Uma. Lord Brahma is said to manifest at the base of Shivalinga while 
Lord Vishnu at its center. After the installment of Shivalinga it should be 
worshipped with appropriate rituals. The Shivalinga should be adorned with 
clothes and its ablution should be performed. 

1004 
 



A devotee should chant the Brahma vigyan mantras for the consecration of 
Lord Brahma who is supported to manifest at the base of Shivalinga. Similarly, 
for the consecration of Lord Vishnu dwelling at the center of Shivalinga, 
Gayatri at the center of Lord Shiva is consecrated by the chanting of any of the 
following mantras--- OM NAMAH SHIVAY; NAMO HANSA SHIVAY CHA A 
devotee should then worship the Shivalinga and make offerings in the 
sacrificial fire. 
VAJRESHWARI VIDYA  
The sages requested Suta to elaborate upon the rituals of Vajravahanika Vidya 
or Vajreshwari Vidya. Suta replied--- Anybody who is desirous of vanquishing 
his enemy must perform the rituals of Vajreshwari Vidya. The devotee should 
worship Vajra (a spear) and make offerings in the sacrificial fire holding it 
(Vajra) in his hand. The following mantra should be chanted while making 
offerings. 
OM BHURBHUVAH SWAH TATSAVITUR VARENYAM BHARGO DEVASYA 
DHIMAHI DHIYO YONAH PRACHODAYAT; OM PHAT JAHI HOOM PHAT 
CHHINDHI MINDHIJAHI HAN HAN SWAHA. 
In the past Lord Brahma had taught this secret Vidya to Indra with the help of 
which he had killed the ferocious demon Vritrasur. A man can acquire all the 
types of supernatural powers with the help of Vajreshwari Vidya. Describing 
about the rituals of Mrityunjay Japa, Suta said-- A person who chants 
Mrityunjay mantra with appropriate rituals becomes free from the fear of 
death. A devotee is required to make offerings of ghee in the sacrificial fire for 
one lakh times. 
Instead of ghee he can also make offerings of ghee and sesame seeds or 
dhoob grass, ghee, milk and honey. 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF YOGA  
The sages asked Suta as to how should a devotee meditate on Lord Triyambak 
following the path of Yoga. Suta then retold the tale which Mandishwar had 
once narrated to Sanatkumar— 

1005 
 



1. The first type of Yoga is called Mantra Yoga. In this type of yoga a devotee 
tries to attain deep state of meditation by chanting mantras. The chanting of 
mantras helps a man to concentrate his mind. 
2. The second type of Yoga is known as Sparsh Yoga. In this type of yoga, a 
man acquires perfection in breath-control by constantly practicing various 
exercises like Rechak (exhalation), Kumbhak (retention), etc. These exercises 
help to purify the nerves and blood vessels. 
3. The third type of yoga is known as Bhava Yoga. This is the state in which a 
person's mind is totally engrossed in the thoughts of Lord Mahadeva. This 
state of mind can not be attained unless the two former types of yoga have 
been mastered. 
4. The fourth type of Yoga is called Abhava-yoga. When a man has mastered 
this particular yoga his ego is subdued in totality. 
5. The fifth type of yoga is called Maha yoga. It helps a man to understand his 
real self and get united with the supreme Almighty. The secret of Yoga should 
be revealed to worthy disciples who are virtuous and religious." This way, Suta 
described the divine tales of Linga Purana and blessed the sages. The Linga 
Purana contains eleven thousand shlokas in it. The study of Linga Purana 
fulfills all the four worldly aspirations of a man- Dharma, Artha, Kam and 
Moksha.It also helps a man to attain salvation. 
Home   
  

1006 
 



12. NARADA PURANA  
CHAPTER ONE  
TALK BETWEEN SUTA AND SAGES IN NAIMISHARANYA  
Once upon a time, about twenty-six thousand sages assembled in the holy 
ambience of Naimisharanya. All of them had renounced their desires and 
homely comforts and were worshipping Lord Vishnu for the benefit of the 
entire humanity. 
During their stay in Naimisharanya, those sages called a huge assembly to 
discuss about the means of attaining all the four goals of life like Dharma, 
Artha, Kama and Moksha. The great sage Shaunak was presiding over the 
assembly. He said: "O sages! We have assembled here to discuss the most 
cryptic disciplines of life. But it is beyond my powers to answer the questions 
you have put before me. Only a great sage like Suta, who is the most learned 
disciple of Veda Vyasa, is able to answer these questions. Presently, he lives in 
a hermitage in Siddhipeeth. Let us all go there and request him to preach us 
about the cryptic disciplines of life." Hearing these words, all the sages 
thanked Shaunak with joy. Then, led by Shaunak himself, all of them reached 
the hermitage of the sage Suta. At the hermitage, sage Suta welcomed them 
all and satisfied their queries. He said: " O great sages! I narrate to you, the 
great Purana, which was once narrated by the great saint Sanatkumar to 
Devarshi Narada and now known as Narada Purana." 
 
CHAPTER -  2  
NARADA PRAYS TO LORD VISHNU  
Shaunak says: "Suta, how did Sanatkumar unfold the mystic character of the 
religion to Narada? When and where they had the meeting to hold this pious 
discussion? Kindly tell us in detail." Suta says: "The great sage Sanatkumar, 
who was free from illusions, was the creation of Brahma's imagination. He 
always remained engrossed in the worship of Brahma.  

1007 
 



Once, he was going towards the peaks of the mighty Meru Mountains 
(Himalayas) when on the way, he happened to sight the sacred Ganges. He 
was about to take a dip in the waters when Devarshi Narada also arrived 
there. Devarshi Narada greeted his elder brother and took bath in the river. 
After carrying out usual rituals, they seated there and started a discussion 
about the virtues of Lord Vishnu." Devarshi Narada asked- "O brother! How 
can one realize the Lord Vishnu? Who is the cause of this whole creation? 
What is the appearance of devotion, knowledge and penance? Kindly 
elaborate the mystery of treating the guests also. Also tell me, how did Lord 
Vishnu effected the origin of Brahma and other Gods?" Sanatkumar says: In 
the beginning of creation, the self-illuminating Lord Vishnu created Brahma 
from His right hand side, Rudra from His central part and Vishnu, his own 
replica from His left hand side. As Lord Vishnu is omnipresent, similarly his 
illusions are also omnipresent and known with different names like Lakshmi, 
Uma, Shakti and Chandi. These are the powers of Lord Vishnu. Some people 
identify these powers with the illusions created by the Lord whereas the sages 
regard them as nature." The Gods, who protect the world, are Purusha, and 
the Supreme Being, who is above these levels, is Lord. Nobody else is greater 
than He is. From His navel even Brahma has originated on a divine lotus. He is 
the Supreme Being the eternal joy incorporating all the three virtues. 
O Narada! Five senses- sights, sound, scent, touch and taste have originated 
from the ego. Ego is the origin of other eleven senses also. These five senses in 
turn gave rise to five physical elements- ether, air, fire, water and earth. It was 
after the creation of these five physical elements that Brahma created the 
lower living beings. Then he created human beings followed by the creation of 
all the seven worlds and seven guards of these seven worlds. For the 
inhabitation of the living beings, Brahma also created great mountains, plains 
and seven seas. 
Towards the north of the great saline sea and towards the south of the great 
Himalayas is situated the Holy Land of India. People who worship Lord Shiva 
and Lord Vishnu inhabit this land. 

1008 
 



Because of their virtues, even the Gods worship the people who populate the 
Indian landmass. 
Those ignorant people, who do not seek salvation despite having been born in 
India, have to suffer the tortures of hell as long as the Sun and the Moon shine 
in the sky. The whole world from Brahma to a seemingly unimportant blade of 
grass is the manifestation of Vasudev (Lord Vishnu). 
 
CHAPTER -  3  
PROFILE OF THE SAGE MARKANDEYA 
Sanatkumar says: O sage! Faith has the greatest significance. Achievement of 
everything and appeasement of Lord Vishnu depend upon the faith. Nothing is 
attainable without faith. Such as a human being faces inertia in the absence of 
life and is rendered motionless. Similarly, faith is like a spiritual light without 
which, religious actions of a man come to cease. Similarly, devotion is also 
known as the life of all the achievements. It is also the giver of four supreme 
goals of life like Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. No action succeeds 
without the input of devotion and faith. Even the menial jobs done with faith 
gives everlasting results. On the contrary, even the pious actions of envious 
people go futile. Attainment of God by envious people is impossible. 
Envy is the greatest enemy of the human being. It creates a gap as big as the 
one that separates the sky from the nether world. O Brahmanandan! Only 
those people, who remain engrossed in faithful devotion of God, attain to the 
abode of Vishnu. Fallen are those who, despite having the knowledge of 
Vedas, do not comply with the moral code of conduct of their clan. Neither 
Vedas nor even devotion can save such people. In other words, moral conduct 
is everything. O great sage! Devotion is like mother who is the base of life for 
every living being. 
O Narada! Company of the pious people and the saints is the best means to 
cherish devotion. 

1009 
 



Saints are the teachers of the entire world. When the sins that have been 
accumulating all throughout the previous births decay only when one gets 
pious company and those who once get pious company experiences eternal 
joy. 
Narada says: "O great devotee of Lord Vishnu! Kindly relate the actions and 
appearance of the Lord's devotees to me." Sanatkumar says: "During the 
period of Pralaya, when all the world was inundated, Lord Vishnu was sleeping 
on a Banyan leaf. That scene had amazed Markandeya, the supreme devotee 
of the Lord." The sages asked: "When all the world was inundated, how did 
Markandeya escape? Suta kindly remove our doubt." Suta says: "O great 
sages! Now, I am going to narrate the tale of Markandeya. Listen to it 
carefully."  
Once upon a time, there lived a fortunate sage in the pious land of India. The 
sage was famous as Mrikandu. He had observed a very severe penance at the 
holy pilgrimage center of Shaligram. 
His penance began to cause worry for Indra. So, accompanied by other Gods, 
Indra reached to Lord Vishnu who was resting on Sheshnag in Ksheersagar, 
the ocean of milk. The Gods prayed the Lord to protect them from the 
radiance of Mrikandu. Listening to the prayers offered by the Gods, Lord 
Vishnu appeared in His four-armed form holding conch, wheel, mace and lotus 
in each of those arms. His radiance was enough to beat the shine of crore 
Suns. His radiance caused tremendous joy for the Gods who fell flat at the feet 
of the Lord. 
Lord says: "O Gods! Get up. I am fully aware about your miseries. But your 
worries are meaningless because Maharshi Mrikandu is really a gentleman. He 
is not going to harm you in any way. Even if the situation arises, I am always 
ready to protect you." Saying these words, the Lord disappeared. Thus, 
assured by the Lord's words, the Gods also returned to their abode. On the 
other hand, pleased by Mrikandu's penance, Lord appeared before him. As 
soon as Mrikandu opened his eyes, he saw Lord Vishnu standing before him. 
Lord's four-armed, blue and radiant appearance caused great exhilaration for 

1010 
 



Mrikandu. He fell flat at His feet and prayed Him with tearful eyes. Pleased 
with his prayers, Lord asked Mrikandu to seek a boon. But Mrikandu refused 
saying that he had attained salvation just by having His sight. Still, Lord said 
that His appearance never goes in vain," So, I will be your son who will live a 
long life." Granting this boon, the Lord disappeared."  
 
CHAPTER -  4  
TALE OF THE SAGE MARKANDEYA  
Narada says: "O great sage! Why did Lord Vishnu appear as the son of 
Mrikandu? What did He do as his son? The Puranas say that during the 
Pralaya, Markandeya had witnessed the direct appearance of Lord Vishnu's 
illusion. Kindly narrate these things in detail." Sanatkumar says: "Listen O 
Devarshi! After observing severe penance, the sage Mrikandu got married and 
received an equally virtuous and chaste wife. In the tenth month after their 
marriage, his wife gave birth to an extremely beautiful baby. The baby in fact 
had incorporated the radiance of the Lord. Mrikandu carried out all the 
necessary rituals and consecrations of the baby happily. In his fifth year, he 
carried out the thread ceremony of his son and started to educate him in 
Vedas. His education developed all the pious virtues in his son whom he had 
named Markandeya. After finishing his education, sage Markandeya also 
started a severe penance to please Lord Vishnu. 
Pleased by his penance, Lord Vishnu blessed him with a boon of creating 
Purana Samhita. This is the reason why the sage Markandeya is also known as 
Narayan. O Brahmins! Lord Vishnu did not annihilate Markandeya during the 
Pralaya only to show him His illusions. It was due to this grace that 
Markandeya survived the Pralaya and passed that time floating on a Banyan 
leaf. As long as the Lord slept, Markandeya kept floating on that leaf. As long 
as the night of the Lord lasted, Markandeya stayed on that flimsy leaf. At the 
end of the night, when the inundating Pralaya receded and the Lord 
awakened from His prolonged sleep, He began the work of creation again. It 

1011 
 



was even more amazing for Markandeya to see the inundating water recede 
and new creation taking place. He began to pray the Lord with folded hands. 
Pleased by his prayers, the Lord said that He always protected His devotees 
even during the most severe crises. 
Markandeya then asked about the appearance of the true devotees of the 
Lord. He also expressed his curiosity to know the reasons of their birth. 
Lord Vishnu says: "O great among the sages! The greatest devotees are those 
who do not harm others with their mind, words and actions and who are free 
from envy. Those who have impartial view are best among the devotees. 
Those who protect the human beings, cows, Brahmins, vegetation and remain 
engrossed in discussion of Lord's virtues. Those who salute the garden of basil 
and put the earth from basil's roots on their heads, those who are beloved to 
Lord Shiva, put Tripund on their forehead and worship Him performing Yagyas 
facing south. Those who always donate water and cereals, cows and 
daughters are the excellent among all the devotees. O great sage! These are 
some of the characteristics of a true devotee. Cherish these characteristics 
and you will also attain salvation in the last." Thus, preaching, Lord Vishnu 
disappeared. Markandeya thereafter led a pious life and observed penance 
and in the last he too attained to the supreme abode of the Lord. 
 
CHAPTER -  5  
THE GREATNESS OF THE GANGES  
Suta says- "The glorious description of devotion for Lord Vishnu caused 
extreme joy for Narada." Narada says: "O great sage Sanat! Now kindly tell me 
about such a place of pilgrimage which is even holier than the holiest places of 
pilgrimage." Sanatkumar says: O Narada! Confluence of Ganga and Yamuna is 
the holier than any other place of pilgrimage. The extremely sacred and pious 
Ganga rises from the feet of none other than Lord Vishnu. Yamuna on the 
other hand is the daughter of Surya. Even the remembrance of Ganga is 
enough to do away with all the sins and making one peaceful. 

1012 
 



This place where Ganga and Yamuna merge is famous as Prayag in the world. 
It is the same place where Brahma had once invoked Lord Vishnu in a Yagya. 
Since then, innumerable sages have followed Brahma and performed different 
kinds of Yagyas there. Even a person who recites the name of Ganga hundred 
miles from Prayag attains salvation. Smear the sand of Ganga's bank on the 
forehead is like, in a way, bearing the crescent shaped Moon on the head. 
Those who remember Ganga receive the benefit of performing pilgrimage to 
all the holy places. Among other places of pilgrimage, Varanasi has almost 
equal significance to that of Prayag. O Brahmin! Ganga is the mother of the 
entire world. Mere touch of her sacred waters saved the sixty thousand sons 
of Sagar. No one can describe the greatness of Ganga. 
 
CHAPTER -  6  
FATE OF KING BAHU  
Narada says: "O great sage who in the dynasty of Sagar received salvation 
from Preta Bhava. 
Who was Sagar? Kindly narrate his whole story to me." Sanatkumar says: 
"Long ago, there occurred a king named Bahu in the dynasty of Surya. He was 
very religious in nature and looked after his subjects like his own offspring. 
Everyone was happy in his kingdom, which he ruled with polity and justice". 
But destiny was playing another game for the king. With time, evils like envy 
and ego began to rise in the mind of Bahu. He began to think that nobody else 
was as religious as he was. These evils in turn caused the king to incline 
towards sensual pleasures. O Narada! An unconscious mind is the greatest 
cause of destruction. Everyone, even the better half begins to nurture hostility 
against such a person. So, the same thing happened with the king Bahu. Many 
neighbouring kings together launched a massive attack on the kingdom of 
Bahu and defeated him after a month-long fierce battle. After his defeat, the 
king Bahu left his kingdom and began to wander along with his queens. At last, 
he came to stay beside a big lake. Even the local inhabitants and lower 

1013 
 



creatures hid seeing the king approach. His subjects too had lost their 
sympathies for him. 
Now the life of the king was not more than the death. So, repenting his 
condition, king Bahu met his death in the presence of the sage Aurv. At that 
time, his youngest queen was expecting an issue. After her husband's death, 
she decided to commit Sati. But, the sage Aurv prevented her convincing that 
her would be son would enjoy more popularity than his father had. Besides, 
nothing is more wretched than killing an unborn baby. Thus, convincing the 
queen with all means, sage Aurv guided the queens to perform cremation of 
her husband and other rituals. 
Since then, both the queens began to live in the hermitage of sage Aurv. 
 
CHAPTER -  7  
THE BIRTH OF SAGAR  
Sanatkumar says: - "O Narada! Both the queens were passing their time in the 
hermitage of sage Aurv. When half of the rainy season had passed, the elder 
queen began to cultivate evil feelings for the younger. She, therefore, made 
deceitfully the younger queen to consume poison. But the poison could not 
affect the queen and her unborn baby because of the virtues she had acquired 
serving the sage Aurv. After three months, the younger queen gave birth to a 
son. Sage Aurv carried out necessary rituals and consecrations of the child and 
named him Sagar because he was born with the effect of poison." Sagar began 
to grow in Aurv's hermitage. The sage had started to train the boy in 
weaponry. One day, out of curiosity, Sagar asked his mother about his father. 
His mother related to him all the events that took place with his father king 
Bahu, her husband. Listening to the fate of his father, Sagar took an oath to 
destroy all those who had caused misery to his father. Circumambulating his 
teacher Aurv and taking his mother's permission, Sagar at once set out on his 
mission. His first halt was at the hermitage of sage Vashishta. 

1014 
 



Sagar narrated the whole thing to the sage Vashishta. Sage Vashishta 
presented him with a number of divine weapons and saw him off blessing him 
with a boon for victory. Armed with many divine weapons and the blessings of 
his mother and teachers, Sagar defeated even the most powerful enemies of 
his father in no time and established his rule over the entire earth. The 
defeated kings took asylum in the hermitage of sage Vashishta who assured 
them to be fearless. 
Spies on the other hand informed Sagar about this development. Sagar at 
once set out to the hermitage of Vashishta with an intention of exterminating 
those kings but meanwhile, sage Vashishta had got all the kings shaven. So, 
assuming that his enemies were dead, Sagar mockingly said to sage Vashishta: 
"O sage! Why are you guarding these characterless creatures? I will not spare 
their lives." Vashishta says: "O son! You are great. Now listen to me carefully 
for your benefit. I have already killed your enemies, so you will not gain 
anything killing them again. O king! This physical body is the root of all the 
sins. You will not receive popularity killing the physical body. 
So, give this matter a little thought before killing them." The words of sage 
Vashishta soothed Sagar's anger. Thereafter, sage Vashishta carried out the 
coronation of Sagar. The king Sagar had two wives, Keshini and Sumati. They 
both were the daughters of Vidharba's king Kashyapa. When sage Aurv heard 
about Sagar's coronation, he visited his palace and returned after preaching 
him. Some months later, with a desire of having sons, both the queens 
secretly summoned sage Aurv once again and received the talisman for having 
sons. Meditating for a while, the sage Aurv said: "O fortunate ones! One of 
you will receive a son who will continue his progeny in future and the other 
will have sixty thousand powerful sons." The sage also advised them to seek 
the boon of their respective choices. With time, Keshini gave birth to one son 
Asmanjas who grew in a whimsical person. Sumati gave birth to sixty thousand 
sons who were very obedient initially but following Asmanjas, they too began 
to behave whimsically. Asmanjas had one son, Anshuman who was very 
obedient to his grandfather. Sixty thousand sons of Sagar soon began to 

1015 
 



torment all the three worlds. Perplexed by their atrocities, Indra appealed to 
the sage Kapila to get them rid of their woes. With the inspiration of Sage 
Kapila, Sagar organized an Ashwamedha Yagya. Indra kidnapped the horse of 
the Yagya and tethered at the hermitage of sage Kapila. When all the sixty 
thousand princes reached Kapila's hermitage, they began to abuse him seeing 
the horse there. Infuriated Kapila at once incinerated them with his curse. 
King Sagar then sent Anshuman in search of his sixty thousand sons and 
recovered the horse. Sage Kapila assured Anshuman that his grandson 
Bhagirath would please Ganga to descend and save his ancestors. 
 
CHAPTER -  8  
SALVATION OF SAUDAS  
Narada says: "O great brother! Why did sage Vashishta curse Saudas and how 
did he recover from this curse by the virtue of the Ganges waters?" 
Sanatkumar says: "O Narada! Saudas was a virtuous king. He ruled over his 
subjects religiously. He was very fond of hunting. So, one day, he went on 
hunting in the forest. He continued his excursion all day long. Towards 
evening, he reached at the bank of Godavari and decided to pass the night 
there. In the next morning also, he began his hunting excursion one again. 
During the hunting, he spotted a deer and began to chase it. Chasing the deer, 
he reached the core of the forest. 
There, the king saw a pair of tigers copulating. Saudas was an expert archer. 
He trained an arrow and killed the tigress in just one shot. As soon as the 
tigress died, she assumed the form of an enormous ogress. Death of his 
partner infuriated the tiger, which was in fact a monster in disguise. He 
decided to avenge the death of his mate. On the other hand, the whole event 
frightened the king. He held a hasty parley with his ministers. They 
unanimously took a decision to give up the hunting forever. 
Long afterwards, king Saudas organized an Ashwamedha Yagya in the auspices 
of sage Vashishta. At the completion of Yagya, sage Vashishta went to take a 

1016 
 



bath before taking his meal. Meanwhile, the monster appeared there in the 
guise of Vashishta and expressed his desire to eat meat. Then, in the guise of 
the cook, the monster cooked human flesh and served it in golden bowls. 
When sage Vashishta arrived, Saudas offered him the dishes made of human 
flesh. 
For a while, Vashishta thought in amazement but soon he realized the whole 
thing. Indignantly, he cursed the king to become a man-eating demon.The 
king tried to assert his ignorance and said- "You yourself had expressed your 
desire to eat the meat." With his divine sight, sage Vashishta learnt that the 
king had been tricked with. By then, the king himself got ready to curse the 
sage in retaliation. But his prudent wife Madayanti stopped him. Thus, 
convinced by the queen, the anger of Saudas subsided. But he had taken 
water in his palm, so the problem arose where to dispose it off for it was sure 
to burn anything it fell upon. After a little consideration, the king dropped that 
water right on his feet that burnt immediately. Since then, the king Saudas 
came to be known as Kalmashpad. Sage Vashishta then consoled him. 
Vashishta says: "O king! Imprudence is the root of all the obstacles and crises. 
But O king! You have no reason to be sorry. Your miseries will end soon and 
you will regain your original radiance by the virtue of the Ganges' waters." 
Saying this, sage Vashishta returned to his hermitage. 
The whole body of the king had turned black. Since then, he began to roam in 
the forests like a wild animal. There he ate whatever he found-animals, birds 
and even human beings. Within six months, he devoured all the animals in 
one hundred Yojan expanses of the forests. Then he migrated to another area 
in the forest. One day, in the guise of a monster, Saudas was wandering in a 
forest on the bank of Narmada. There he spotted a sage couple engaged in 
carnal conjugation. Saudas at once got hold of the sage and began to devour 
him. 
The sage's wife pleaded him to release her husband but Saudas did not pay 
heed to her pleas and devoured the sage. In anguish and anger, the Brahmini 
cursed Saudas that he would die if he tried to copulate with a woman and that 

1017 
 



he would always remain a monster. Infuriated, Saudas cursed her in 
retaliation: "O evil one! Just one curse was sufficient. Why did you pour down 
two curses on me? Go and become a Devil." The Brahmini at once turned into 
a Devil. Afterwards, both of them began to wander in the forest. One day, 
they reached to such part of the forest where another monster was living. 
That monster too had acquired the formidable appearance because of not 
obeying his teacher. Seeing them, the monster enquired about the reasons of 
their coming to that forest. They narrated the whole thing to him. 
Saudas says: "O friend! Who are you? Tell me, what sins did you committed. 
Do not conceal anything from your friends." The monster says: "Before 
acquiring this appearance, I was a Brahmin and well versed in all the Vedas. I 
lived in Magadh. One day, blinded by my knowledge and youth, I insulted my 
teacher. 
That is the reason of my acquiring this monster's appearance. Since then, I 
have been eating flesh only and I do not know how many Brahmins I have 
devoured so far. Still, my hunger is insatiated. O fortunate one! Hence I advise 
each and everyone never to insult their teachers." Saudas says: "What is a 
teacher? Who was your teacher?" The monster says: O brother! There are 
many kinds of teachers but I am telling about the most revered ones. All the 
teachers of Vedas, preachers of scriptures and mantras, remover of doubts, 
protectors, wife's father, elder brother, mother's brother, family priest and 
own mother and father fall in the category of teachers. I had received 
preaching about all the religions from sage Gautam while staying on the 
enchanting banks of the Ganges.  
Once, when I went to worship Shiva, I did not greet him. Sage Gautam did not 
mind my behavior but Lord Shiva turned me into a monster out of anger." 
That sort of pious discussion among the monsters attenuated their sins. In the 
meantime, a Brahmin, who had hailed from Kalinga (Orrisa), arrived there 
carrying the holy water of Ganges. 
The monsters requested the Brahmin to sprinkle some of the waters over 
them. They also narrated the greatness of Ganges before the Brahmin. 

1018 
 



Pleased with their willingness, and appraisal of Ganges, the Brahmin sprinkled 
some Ganges water on them. The monster and the ogress resumed their 
divine appearance but Saudas remained unchanged. His worries began to 
mount but the invisible Saraswati consoled and advised him to recite the 
Lord's name. Saudas then migrated to Varanasi where he continuously recited 
the Lord's name and took bath in the holy Ganges. Thus, he overcame the 
curse of Brahmini and returned to his kingdom. There, sage Vashishta once 
again carried out his coronation. Since then, Saudas ruled his kingdom through 
religious means and attained the supreme abode of Lord Vishnu. 
 
CHAPTER -  9  
KING BALI DEFEATS THE GODS  
Narada says: "O brother! Kindly narrate the tale of the Ganges' origin from the 
feet of Lord Vishnu." Sanatkumar says: Long ago, in the beginning of creation, 
one sage Kashyapa had two wives Diti and Aditi. They both were the 
daughters of Daksha. Aditi was the mother of the Gods while Diti had given 
birth to demons. Thus, the demons and the Gods were stepbrothers and 
fought accordingly for the power and prestige. Demons were elder. 
HiranyaKashyapa, the demon king was the son of Diti. His son Prahlada was a 
great devotee of Lord Vishnu. In the lineage of Prahlada, occurred the great 
king Bali who was the son of Virochan. 
Bali had conquered entire earth and was now eyeing the heaven. Bali had two 
ministers, Kubhand and Koopkarna and an equally prowessive son Ban. With a 
huge army, Bali launched a massive attack on heaven and soon a fierce battle 
broke out. The battle lasted for one thousand years. At last, the Gods lost the 
heaven to the demons and began to wander here and there in search of 
solace. Defeating the Gods, the king Bali organized many Ashwamedha 
Yagyas. 
Feeling sorry for the plight of her sons, Aditi began a severe penance on the 
Himalayas. 

1019 
 



 
CHAPTER -  10  
ORIGIN OF THE GANGES  
Narada says: "O brother! You narrated a wonderful tale. Now, kindly relate to 
me, how did the Ganges originate?" Sanatkumar says: O Narada! Pleased with 
the severe penance of Aditi, Lord Vishnu appeared before her and asked her 
to seek a boon. Feeling elated with exhilaration, Aditi fell flat at the Lord's 
feet. She intimated the Lord about the plight of her sons and sought that He 
should help them to regain the heaven without killing the demons for they 
were also her sons though step. 
Pleased by her indiscrimination for her stepsons, Lord Vishnu assured Aditi 
that soon He would arrive as her son and save the Gods from their miseries. 
Then, the Lord presented Aditi with His garland and disappeared. In due 
course of time, Aditi gave birth to a son who was holding a conch, a wheel, a 
mace and a lotus in each of his four hands. The child was named as Vamana. 
Even his father, sage Kashyapa greeted him with respect. 
By the time, when the thread ceremony was about to be carried out for 
Vamana, king Bali organized a grand Ashwamedha Yagya in the auspices of his 
teacher Shukracharya. Lord Vishnu Himself had been invoked in the Yagya 
along with Lakshmi. Taking his parent's permission, Vamana too arrived at the 
sight of the Yagya. With their divine sight, all the sages who were present 
there recognized Lord Vishnu and felt extreme joy and greeted Him with 
respect. Even Shukracharya understood the motive of Vamana's coming there. 
He cautioned Bali in isolation not to grant any demand of Vamana. He also 
advised Bali to abide by his dictate or he would have to face severe 
consequences. 
But illumined by the destiny, king Bali did not pay heed to Shukracharya's 
advice and welcomed Vamana warmly and asked him to seek anything he 
wished. Vamana said: "O king! If you want to give me something, kindly grant 
me three steps of land so that I may carry out my Yagyas smoothly. King Bali 

1020 
 



tried to dissuade Vamana with temptations of heavenly comforts and other 
luxuries. But Vamana stayed to his demand that he needed nothing else but 
three steps of land for carrying out Yagyas. At last Bali agreed to grant his 
demand. He requested Vamana to pour some water from the Kamandalu on 
his palm so that he could take a vow. As the last attempt to prevent Bali from 
making a vow, Shukracharya assumed a miniature appearance and clogged 
the snout of the kamandalu. The omniscient Lord pricked the snout with a 
sharp stem and pricked Shukracharya's one eye. 
Thereafter, taking some water on his palm, king Bali proceeded to grant 
Vamana three steps of land. As soon as Bali granted the demand, Vamana 
assumed a gigantic appearance and measured the entire earth and heaven in 
his two steps. While Lord Vishnu was measuring the universe, it broke into 
two pieces with the impact of His toe. With the tearing of the universe, 
millions of streams sprang out. In the course of their flow, these streams 
merged into a single mightier stream and, sanctifying Brahma and other 
deities, fell on the mighty Sumeru Mountain (Himalayas). As there was no 
other room left for the Lord to put His third step, Bali presented his own head 
for the purpose. Vamana put his third step on Bali's head and pressed him 
down into the hades. 
Narada says: "O great sage! How did the Lord arrange for Bali's food in the 
nether world?" Sanatkumar says: "Oblations offered without hymns and alms 
given to undeserving person constitute the food for Bali. Thus, the Lord 
snatched the kingdom of heaven from Bali without any bloodshed and 
returned it to the Gods."  
 
CHAPTER -  11  
DEFINITION OF DHARMA  
Narada says:"O great sage! I have just heard the tale of sacred Ganges. Now 
kindly describe about the people who deserve to take donations." Sanatkumar 

1021 
 



says: O Narada! Brahmin is considered as the excellent among all the four 
castes. 
Hence, to make the donation fruitful, one should donate to the Brahmins only. 
A Brahmin can accept donation candidly but not a Vaishya or a Kshatriya. Even 
among Brahmins, there are many categories who do not deserve to accept 
donation. 
These are- Brahmins who practice astrology, act against the religion, who are 
greedy, who sell scriptures and other religious materials, who have relations 
with other women than their wives, who are envious, ungrateful, singer, who 
have characterless wife, who are soldiers, priests, harbinger, cook, poet, 
doctor, who eat meat and cereals given by a Shudra, who carry out cremation 
and the Brahmins who consume the food given by prostitutes. Donation given 
to all these types of Brahmins go futile. Besides these, Brahmins who 
habitually enjoy sensual pleasures during siesta, who dine during the dusk, 
who have been boycotted by their brothers and society, who have taken birth 
illegitimately or after the death of their real father because of dubious 
relations of their mother, whose younger brother have married earlier and 
those who are always controlled by lusty women, who act as pimps or remain 
indulged in mean activities also do not deserve donation. 
Donation, spending to meet necessities and wasting in useless activities are 
the three fates of wealth. A donation made selflessly to a deserving person on 
a request is excellent among all kinds of donations. A donation made with 
some desire is mediocre while donation given as sacrifice is of the lowest 
category. 
Sanatkumar then narrated the tale of Bhagirath and Dharmaraj. 
Once, Dharmaraj visited the kingdom of king Sagar. Dharmaraj praised Sagar 
overtly. With folded hands, king Sagar requested Dharmaraj to preach him 
about religion and non-religion and tell him something about divine worlds 
and hell. Dharmaraj says:"O king! Providing a Brahmin family or a Vedapathi 
Brahmin with a means of sustenance is the most virtuous donation. 

1022 
 



Inspiring others to make donation to such a Brahmin is also equally fruitful. 
Apart from these, digging out reservoirs and maintaining them and inspiring 
others to do the same thing also bears unending fruits." To corroborate his 
point, Dharmaraj narrated the tale of king Veerbhadrak and his minister 
Buddhiraj. 
 
CHAPTER -  12  
DESCRIPTION OF RELIGIOUS ACTION  
Dharmaraj says: "O king! Those who build temples with earth stay in the 
abode of Vishnu for three kalpas. Then they attain Brahmaloka. One receives 
double virtues if he builds a temple with wood. Building a temple with bricks 
and stones gives four-fold virtue while with the precious stones one gets ten-
fold virtues. Building of temple with copper and gold gives hundred fold and 
crore fold virtues. Those who preserve temples and reservoirs receive 
hundred times more virtues than the builders do. Virtues of a rich man 
donating whole estate and a poor person donating a yard of land are equal.”  
“O virtuous one! Those who develop gardens and parks also receive same 
virtues. Those who preserve them receive more virtues than the developers. 
One who plants a basil sapling saves his crores of ancestors. Similarly, those 
who bathe the Lord's idol with milk on Dwadashi and Poornamasi save 
millions of their ancestors. Those who bathe Lord's idol with Panchamrit on 
Ekadashi receive everlasting joy and salvation. Similarly, those who bathe 
Lord's idol with coconut milk, sugarcane juice, and water containing flowers or 
filtered water get free from all their sins. Similarly, those who bathe Lord 
Vishnu's idol during eclipses or on auspicious dates and conjugations receive 
the virtue of all the Yagyas. Those who bathe Lord Vishnu's and Shiva's idols 
with coconut milk, ghee, honey and sesame oil on auspicious dates assume 
respective appearances of these Gods.”  
“Those who worship Lord Vishnu and Shiva offering them flowers of lotus, 
Pandanus, and particularly offer Dhatura to Lord Shiva attain their respective 

1023 
 



abodes. Similarly, donation of Guggul (scented raisin), lamp, water and cereal 
bears inexhaustible fruits. Virtues of donating land and milch cow to a 
Brahmin cannot be described in words. It is the case with the donation of 
knowledge, Shaligram, Shivalinga, horse, buffalo, elephant or any other 
vehicle. Those who arrange for the cremation of an orphaned Brahmin receive 
virtues equal to thousands of Ashwamedha Yagyas. Those who serve the 
Brahmin deities or cow, those who play instruments, bell, and blow conch or 
clap in the temple enjoy intimacy with divine beauties in the heaven for five 
Kalpas. Blowing of conch helps one attain the abode of Vishnu. Even the 
remembrance of Lord Vishnu's name does away with the imminent crises."  
 
CHAPTER -  13  
EXPIATION FOR THE SINS  
Dharmaraj says: "O king! I am now going to narrate about the religion. Listen 
to it faithfully. If a person touches or gets touched by an impure or irreligious 
thing, he should observe fast for three days and six nights for expiation. He 
should take bath thrice a day. If a Brahmin defecates during dining, he must 
give up his food at once and take water only. Then he should observe a fast 
for a day and night and close it taking Panchgavya only to get pure again. If a 
person dines immediately after urination, or urinates during dining, he must 
observe a day and night long fast and close it with Havan. Those women who 
do not serve their husbands should be expelled from the home for a period of 
twelve years and should not be helped in any way during the exile. 
Impurity resulted because of touching a woman in menses takes fast for three 
nights to get purified." Dead body of a person who had committed suicide 
should be smeared with sandalwood paste or any other holy material. If a 
person escapes an attempt to suicide, a fine of two hundred rupees should be 
imposed on him. 
Those who deliberately eat cereals of washers, skinners and other 
downtrodden classes and tribes or have illicit contacts with their women are 

1024 
 



required to observe Chandrayan fast in order to get pure. For those who 
establish abhorrent connection with their mother, sister or daughter, 
selfimmolation is the only way to expiate. Those who mate with their 
teacher's wife formal observance of fast is required. If someone has killed a 
pregnant cow, he must expiate for it observing Chandrayan fast separately for 
each of the animals. 
One should not use the soil collected from pond's bottom, termite's mound, 
mouse burrow, barren land, road, cremation ground and ground used for 
defecation purpose. Use of Panchgavya washes even the most severe sin. If a 
second death occurs in the family while the purification period of first death is 
still on; separate purification is not required. Ill effect of an abortion lasts for 
three days. After marriage, a woman adopts her husband's name. Hence, 
oblation for a married woman must be offered by her son or someone 
belonging to her husband's clan. Ashes must be collected on the first, second, 
third or fourth day after the cremation. One must offer watery oblations to his 
dead ancestors standing in navel-deep water facing south. 
 
CHAPTER -  14  
TORTURE IN THE HELL  
Dharmaraj says: "O king! Those who commit severe sin on earth are bound to 
suffer equally severe torturing in hell. I am now describing about such sins and 
the tortures vouchsafed for them in the hells. Tapan, Balukakumbh, 
Maharaurav, Raurav, Kumbhipak, Pramardan, Lalabhaksha, Vasakup and 
Vaitarni are some of the prominent hells. Drinking of urine in a ditch full of 
feces, eating of canine flesh, eating of worms, drinking of semen, sleeping on 
cinders, stinging by snakes, boring through bones, drinking of bile, biting by 
ants, breaking of teeth, tethering to hot iron etc. are some of the tortures one 
has to face for his sins in the hell. Those who criticize Brahmins and dictate 
them or kill them, drinker, those who steal gold, have illicit contact with the 
wife of their teacher and even those who accompany such people are 

1025 
 



condemned as great sinners. All of them deserve a place in the hell." Stealing 
of items like copper, iron, water, musk, betelnut, sandalwood etc. is also like 
the crime of stealing gold. Illicit contact with sister and daughter-in-law and 
forceful copulation with a woman in menses are also like having illicit contact 
with the wife of the teacher. Our great sages have given dictates for the 
expiation of such sins. Those who live in Buddhist monasteries or frequently 
visit there live in the hells for crores of years. Sinners pass initial phase of their 
expiation in the hells. For the seven births then, they take incarnation as 
asses. Then for the next six births, they appear as snake, diseased people, dog, 
deer, tree and monitor. O king! Those who long for and have illicit contacts 
with women other than wife are forced to copulate with a pretty but 
extremely hot copper mannequin and then thrown into the hells. Those 
women who prefer to sleep with men other than husband are forced to 
embrace hot iron statue on a blazing bed. Then they are forced to embrace a 
hot iron pillar, take bath in saline water, and drink it. They have to suffer these 
tortures for thousand years. 
Those who listen to other's criticism with interest have to bear lot of suffering. 
Hot nails are hammered into their ears. The pores thus formed are filled with 
boiling oil. They are then thrown into Kumbhipak hell. 
Those who abuse Lord Vishnu and Shiva are fed with salt only for crores of 
years then they are thrown into Raurav hell, which is full of hot scorching 
sand. Traitors and greedy of other's cereals have to eat their own flesh. Those 
who eat astrologer's and priest's cereals are kept in different hells for crores 
of years followed by their keeping in the wells of boiling oil and saline water 
where they are fed with feces only. At the completion of their punishment, 
such people appear as Malechchha on earth. Those who torment others are 
thrown into Vaitarni. Those who do not perform Panchmaha Yagya or worship 
deities are kept in Lalabhaksha and Raurav hells respectively. Those who do 
not act as per the scriptures are thrown into the hells for thousand crores of 
Kalpas. Those who throw excretion from their bodies or leave parts like hair, 
tooth, bone, nails etc. in the temple commit sins equal to killing an unborn 

1026 
 



baby. They are subjected to severe tortures in the hells before being sent into 
abhorrent incarnations. Those who give false witness undergo sufferings in 
the hells till the rules of fourteen Indras. Those who do not curb immoral 
traffic despite being capable go to hell. Those who falsely blame gentlepeople 
have to live in the hell for crores of years. Those who give up a fast before 
stipulated period go to the hell named Asipatra. There is no penance for the 
ones who adopt partial view during justice or religious education. Those who 
consume cow's flesh live in Vingbhojya hell for thousands of years. Those who 
torture Brahmins through their thoughts, actions and words always fall in the 
hell. Those who destroy gardens have to suffer all the above mentioned hells. 
O king!" One must repent for his sins before Lord Vishnu. Sight of the Ganges 
and basil, singing of devotional songs, magnanimity and non-violence 
attenuate the effect of the sin. No action bears fruit if not offered to Lord 
Vishnu. Devotion to Lord Vishnu is the excellent way to repent for the sins. 
Abidance to morality is the best way to train the religion. Religion without 
morality is equally painful. O king! Now I have related all about religion. Since 
now onwards, cultivate devotion for Lord Vishnu and invoke the Ganges to 
descend on earth in order to save your sinister ancestors. Only the Ganges is 
capable of saving one and all." Sanatkumar says: "O Narada! Thus preaching 
the king Sagar, Dharmaraj disappeared from the sight. It was due to the 
severe penance of king Bhagirath that the Ganges descended on the earth and 
saved the sixty thousand deceased sons of Sagar."  
 
CHAPTER -  15  
DESCENT OF GANGES AND SALVATION OF SAGAR'S SONS  
Narada says:"O Muni! What did king Bhagirath do on Himalayas? How did he 
please Ganges to descend on the earth?" Sanatkumar says: O Narada! 
Renouncing all his royal comforts, Bhagirath went to the snowcapped, lofty 
peaks of the Himalayas. There he saw dense forest and herds of deer and 
elephants playing. Even his hermitage was full of sweet chattering of the birds. 

1027 
 



Reciting of Vedas and other scriptures was reverberating all around. Bhagirath 
came face to face with the sage Bhrigu who was surrounded by his disciples. 
Bhagirath approached and respectfully greeted the sage Bhrigu. 
Bhagirath says: "O omniscient sage! Kindly grace me with the knowledge of 
the path that leads even the most mournful souls to salvation." Bhrigu says: 
"O king! I know that you have arrived here with a beautiful motive of saving 
your ancestors. Hence, you are like Sri Hari yourself. Now, I describe about the 
actions, which please Sri Hari. O king, be non-violent, altruistic, virtuous, speak 
truth and seek pious company to be a devotee of Lord Vishnu. Recite the 
following mantras- AUM NAMO BHAGVATE VASUDEVAY NAMAH |AUM 
NAMO VASUDEVAY You will definitely attain peace of mind." Bhagirath says: 
"O sage! What is truth? What is in the interest of all the living beings? Who 
are evil ones? Who are ascetics? What are virtuous actions? How should one 
remember and worship Lord Vishnu? What is peace? O great sage! Kindly 
describe about these things." Bhrigu says: "O knowledgeous one! All such 
actions, which do not harm any living being, are non-violence. Actions, which 
aid in moral conduct and pacify the people, are in the interest of the public. All 
the people who are envious and oppose the religion and the scriptures are evil 
ones. Those who tread the path shown by religion and scriptures and always 
engage in the benefit of people are ascetics in the true sense. All the actions, 
which lead to devotion for Lord Vishnu and cause extreme joy for all are 
virtuous. Lord Vishnu incorporates all the other deities. 
Having such thoughts like 'I will worship Him with correct methods' is 
devotion. Seeing Lord Vishnu in each living and non-living things is impartial 
view. To be in peace and harmony in all circumstances with each and 
everyone is peace. O king! I have described now all the things to you. Go now 
and begin your penance. May it all be well for you." Thus, with the permission 
and blessing of sage Bhrigu, king Bhagirath started his penance. He continued 
his penance for sixty thousand years at length in an enchanting place 
Nandeshwar in Himalayas. Seeing his severe penance, and perplexed by its 
radiance, all the Gods appeared before Lord Vishnu in Ksheersagar. 

1028 
 



The Gods say: "O remover of sorrows! O controller of all the three worlds! We 
all greet you." Pleased by the prayers, Lord Vishnu instinctively learnt about 
the motive of the Gods. He assured them to be fearless and Himself appeared 
before Bhagirath. Bhagirath felt hilarious and greeted Sri Hari. 
Lord Vishnu says: "Your desires shall be fulfilled. Your ancestors shall attain to 
my abode. But now go and pray Lord Shiva with your full capacity. He will 
definitely benefit you." Saying this, Lord Vishnu disappeared. The king stood 
there for some time wondering whether it was all a dream when an invisible 
voice announced, 'it was not a dream O king! It is reality. Do as Lord Vishnu 
has said.' King Bhagirath began even more severe penance to please Lord 
Shiva. After a prolonged penance, Lord Shiva appeared there. Bhagirath fell 
flat at His feet. Pleased by his devotion and prayers, Lord Shiva blessed 
Bhagirath that He would hand over the Ganges to him for the salvation of his 
ancestors. As soon as Lord Shiva uttered these words, the Ganges emerged 
from His tussocks and followed Bhagirath wherever he walked. 
Thus, following Bhagirath, the Ganges reached Gangasagar at the hermitage 
of sage Kapila where the ashes of Bhagirath's ancestors were lying 
unattended. As soon as the holy waters of the Ganges touched the ashes, 
Bhagirath's ancestors got freed from the noose of Yama and ascended to their 
heavenly abode. Since then, the Ganges is also known as Bhagirathi. 
 
CHAPTER -  16  
DESCRIPTION OF DWADASHI FAST 
The sages say: "O fortunate one! You have obliged us narrating the tale of 
sacred Ganges. Now we desire to hear what Narada asked Sanatkumar." Suta 
says: "O great sages! Now I narrate what Narada asked Sanatkumar, listen to it 
carefully." Narada says: "I am blessed hearing the pious tale of the Ganges. 
Now kindly tell me about the fast and rituals performing which, Sri Hari could 
be pleased." Sanatkumar says: O Narada! May God bless you! You are the 
supreme devotee of Lord Vishnu. 

1029 
 



That's why, you are asking about these rituals. Now I am telling you about 
these rituals and fasts, which make a man fearless. O Narada! There is a 
special provision for worshipping Lord Vishnu on the twelfth day of Shukla 
Paksha (brighter phase) in the month of Margashirsh. This worship could be 
performed wearing white or yellow clothes. During the worship, one should 
recite the mantra - KESHAVAYA NAMAS-TUBHYAM. 
One should then offer oblations of ghee and sesame seeds in sacred fire. 
During the night, one should sing devotional songs before Shaligram and 
remain awakened. Then the idol of Vishnu should be bathed with five liters of 
milk. Similarly, Goddess Lakshmi and Lord Vishnu should be worshipped with 
Naivedya and edible items three times. Next morning, similar worship should 
be repeated. 
At the end of the worship, one should donate sweetmeats made of milk, ghee 
and coconut to Brahmin while reciting-'May the Lord materialize all my 
wishes.' Seeing off the Brahmin, one should break his fast at the end. 
On the same day, in the month of Pausha, one should observe a fast and 
worship Lord Vishnu's idol bathing it with milk while reciting NAMO 
NARAYANA. 
In this worship also, there is provision of nightlong prayers and vigilance. 
Donating the Brahmins with rice, pulses, ghee etc., one should respectfully 
feed them and break his fast in the last. Donation of Dakshaina is a must. 
Similarly, on the same day in the month of Magh, there is a provision of 
daylong fast and worship. This time, five kilos of sesame seeds are donated to 
the Brahmins. 
On the twelfth day of Shukla Paksha in Phagun, one should bathe Sri Hari's 
idol with five liters of milk. Then one hundred and eight oblations of sesame 
seeds and ghee are made to the sacred fire. Nightlong prayers, feeding of 
Brahmins etc. are as usual. In this worship, unhusked rice is donated. The 
required mantra is GOVINDAY NAMAS-TUBHYAM On the same day in the 
month of Chaitra, there is a provision of bathing Vishnu's idol with five liters of 

1030 
 



ghee and making oblations of honey, ghee and sesame seeds one hundred 
and eight times while reciting -NAMOSTU VISHNAVE TUBHYAM Then four 
kilos of rice are donated to a Brahmin. On the twelfth day in the brighter 
phase of Vaishakh, there is a provision of bathing Vishnu's idol with milk and 
making one hundred and eight oblations of ghee reciting -NAMASTE 
MADHUHANTE On the twelfth day in the brighter phase of Jyeshtha, there is a 
provision of offering one hundred and eight oblations of kheer (rice cooked in 
four liters of milk) while reciting NAMAH TRIVIKRAMAY. 
Twenty Malpuas (wheat flour kneaded in milk and sugar and fried in ghee) are 
donated to a Brahmin. 
On the same day in the month of Ashadh, Lord Vishnu's idol is bathed with 
four liters of milk. 
Then oblations of ghee are made and cereal mixed with coconut and curd are 
donated to the Brahmins. This worship is directed to Vamana incarnation of 
Lord Vishnu. Hence, mantra NAMASTE VAMANAY is recited all along the 
rituals. 
In the month of Shravan, there is a provision of bathing Lord's idol with milk 
and honey on the twelfth day of the brighter phase. Then one hundred and 
eight oblations are made reciting - SRIDHARAY NAMOSTUTE. 
Then four liters of milk, clothes and two golden earrings are donated to the 
Brahmin. 
Lord's idol should be bathed with milk while reciting - HRISHIKESH NAMOS-
TUBHYAM on the twelfth day in the month of Bhadrapad. 
Then one hundred and eight oblations are made with cooked cereals mixed 
with honey. Wheat donated along with gold to the Brahmins besides feeding 
them with respect. 
In the month of Ashwin also, Lord's idol is bathed with five liters of milk. Then, 
one hundred and eight oblations are offered with ghee, sesame seeds and rice 
reciting - NAMASTE PADMANABHAY. 

1031 
 



Two hundred and fifty grams of honey are donated to a Brahmin. In the 
month of Kartik, on the same day, Lord's idol is bathed with four liters of milk, 
curd or ghee while reciting- NAMO DAMODARAY. 
Then, one hundred and eight oblations are offered with sesame seeds mixed 
with honey and ghee. This worship is closed with donating five types of edible 
items to a deserving Brahmin, feeding him and seeing him off with Dakshaina. 
O Munivar! Those who observe this virtuous fast for the twelve months of a 
year attains to the supreme abode. Observance of this fast for one or two 
months only is also equally benefiting. If this fast is observed for a year, there 
is a provision of special closing ritual at the end so that one shouldn't have to 
observe it again in his life. This closing ritual is performed on the twelfth day 
of the darker phase in the month of Margsheersh.One should get up early in 
the morning that day and after attending routine tasks; he should take bath, 
wear white clothes, smear sandalwood paste on the forehead and make a 
square-shaped altar on the ground. This altar should be decorated with 
jingling bells, whiskers, flags and white cloth. On the four corners of the altar, 
four lamps should be lighted. 
At the center of the altar, a Sarvatobhadra wheel is drawn and twelve urns 
filled with water are kept on it. Putting five kinds of gems in these urns, they 
should be covered with white cloth. The worshipper must procure silver or 
gold idols of Lakshmi and Lord Vishnu and place them on the lids of the urns. 
Frugality is not expected in this ritual. These idols should be bathed with milk 
containing ghee, honey, curd and five types of dry fruits. It should be followed 
with proper worship of Lord Vishnu and Goddess Lakshmi. These rituals last 
nightlong. 
Next morning, oblations are offered with sesame seeds reciting all the twelve 
mantras described above. Donation of ten Malpuas, curd, kheer, ghee etc. are 
made to twelve Brahmins. At last, all the idols and other materials are handed 
over to the priest who had guided the worship. Devotee must dine after all 
and he should not speak during dining. All the desires of the one who 

1032 
 



observes all these twelve fasts and closes them properly are fulfilled and he 
attains abode of Vishnu along with his twenty-one generations. 
 
CHAPTER -  17  
DESCRIPTION OF FAST FOR LAKSHMI-NARAYAN  
Sanatkumar says: "O great among the sages! Now I am narrating about an 
excellent fast, which destroys all the sins. Observing fast on full Moon day is 
considered excellent among all the fasts. 
It leads to fulfillment of all the desires and protects the devotee from 
influence of harsh planets. 
Like the fast of Dwadashi, this fast is also begun from the month of 
Margsheersh and observed continuously on every full Moon day of succeeding 
months till Kartik when it is closed with proper rituals". 
To begin with, one should start worshipping Lord Vishnu since the morning of 
full Moon day in the month of Margsheersh wearing white clothes and 
reciting NAMO NARAYANA. 
After the worship, the devotee must perform a Havan on a square-shaped 
altar offering oblations with cooked cereals, sesame seeds, ghee etc. White 
flowers, unbroken rice grains and water are offered to the Lord. In the 
evening, the same things are offered to the rising full Moon also. A devotee 
must pass the night engaged in religious discussion, singing of devotional 
songs etc. 
Next day, donations are made to the Brahmins after performing usual 
worship. The same rituals are performed every month to observe the fast. 
Rituals for closing this fast in the month of Kartik on full Moon day are also 
elaborate. 
Fist of all, the devotee should build a rectangular canopy and decorate it with 
floral garlands, arches, lamps, cinnabar, mirrors, whiskers etc. At the center of 
the canopy, on the ground, Sarvatobhadra wheel should be drawn with five 

1033 
 



pillars. Then one to twelve urns are kept on this wheel and on these urns, 
silver or golden idols of Lord Vishnu are placed. These idols are bathed with 
milk containing curd, ghee, honey and five types of dry fruits. Then a proper 
elaborate worship is carried out for these idols. Night is passed singing 
devotional songs. Next morning, after proper worship, these idols are donated 
to the presiding priest. It is followed by feeding of Brahmins. All these rituals 
are closed with performing a Havan offering sesame seeds as oblation. Those 
who perform these worships with proper rituals enjoy worldly comforts 
lifelong and attain abode of Lord Vishnu. 
 
CHAPTER -  18  
FLAGGING IN THE TEMPLE OF LORD VISHNU  
Sanatkumar says: "O Narada! Now I am narrating about the flagging fast in 
order to please Lord Vishnu. He who performs this fast is even worshipped by 
Brahma and other deities. This fast accords virtues equal to those of donating 
one thousand carats of gold to a Brahmin or those attained taking bath in the 
Ganges and worshipping Shivalinga and basil sapling. " The devotee should 
observe this fast on the tenth day of the brighter phase in the month of Kartik. 
He should worship Sri Hari since morning after taking bath and wearing fresh 
clothes. He is expected to sleep before the idol that day. Next day, he should 
again perform worship, recite Nandishraddh along with four Brahmins and 
bathe masts of the two flags. He should then worship the Sun, the Moon and 
Garuda. 
Then turmeric, sandalwood paste are smeared on the masts and white flowers 
are offered on them. Thereafter, the devotee must smear just enough ground 
with cow dung and produce a fire in an altar. One hundred and eight oblations 
are made with kheer in this fire. Havan thus performed is directed to Lord 
Vishnu, Brahma and Lakshmi then eight oblations are offered reciting -
VENTEYAY SWAHA. 
It is followed by oblations offered to the Sun, the Moon and Kamadhenu. 

1034 
 



The night is passed in worship and performing Havans. Next morning, the 
same rituals are performed to worship Lord Vishnu. At last, the flags are 
carried to a temple of Lord Vishnu and installed at the pinnacle or on top of a 
column. Lord Vishnu is worshipped with proper rituals. 
Circumambulating the temple, one should then present Brahmins with clothes 
and Dakshaina, feed them and should take food after all. It is said that as long 
as the flag flutters in air, as much sins of the devotee are destroyed and he 
attains the abode of Lord Vishnu. 
 
CHAPTER -  19  
TALE OF THE KING SUMITS PREVIOUS BIRTH  
Narada says: "O Sanatkumar! A king Sumit had performed this flagging fast for 
the first time. 
Kindly narrate to me the tale of his life." Sanatkumar says: During Satya Yuga, 
a Somavanshi king Sumit was ruling the entire earth. He was very religious in 
nature and a great devotee of Lord Vishnu. He served the other devotees with 
respect and was a down to earth person.His queen Satyamati was also a 
chaste woman. Both of them were the great worshippers of Sri Hari and knew 
everything about their previous birth. They regularly donated cereals and 
water. 
Satyamati used to dance in the temple of Lord Vishnu with pure feelings. The 
king also would install a big and beautiful flag in the temple on the twelfth day 
of brighter phase of every month. 
Their reputation had reached all the three worlds. One day, a sage Vibhandak 
came to visit the king along with his disciples. The king and the queen treated 
the sage with respect and the king himself seated on a lower seat before the 
sage. 

1035 
 



The king says: "I am saved O sage! Now order me how can I serve you?" The 
sage says: "O king! I am very much pleased with you. Now I will ask you a few 
questions. 
Answer them honestly. You regularly install a big and beautiful flag in the 
temple of Lord Vishnu whereas there are many more rituals to please Him. 
Tell me the reason for your actions." The king says: "O sage! I tell the reason 
for my action. Kindly listen to it. In the previous birth, I was a Shudra named 
Malini and always engaged in appalling activities. One day, I abandoned my 
family and society and migrated to the forest where I sustained myself on 
deer's flesh. But there too, I used to rob the passersby. One day, I had nothing 
to eat nor could I lay my hand on any passerby. Scorching sun of the summer 
was adding to my woe moreover. Thus perplexed by the thirst, hunger and 
intense heat, I was roaming in the forest when all of a sudden I stumbled upon 
a temple of Lord Vishnu. It had long been deserted and was very much in 
dilapidated condition. A small lake was also there beside the temple. In the 
lake, beautiful birds like swan and ducks were playing and delicious fruits and 
scented flowers also abounded in the forest. 
Since I was feeling tired to the point of dropping down, I ate the fruits which 
had fallen on the ground. Then I took rest at the bank of the lake. 
Since that day, I began to live in that temple. There I repaired the walls, 
cleaned the premises and erected a small hut for myself. But still, I used to 
hunt small animals to satisfy my hunger. 
Twenty years passed like that. One day, a Sadhvi (a female hermit) named 
Avakokila, who hailed from a Nishad family in Vindhyachal, came there. Her 
family members had deserted her because of sinister actions she was involved 
in. She was thin and lean due to continuous starvation. Feeling pity on her, I 
gave her some fruits and flesh to eat. When she recovered, she narrated her 
tale that I am narrating to you as it was." Sadhvi says: "I was born in the family 
of oarsman, Daruk was my father. I was a great backbiter, thief and sinner. My 
family therefore deserted me. For sometime, my husband fostered me but he 
too died. Since then, I have been wandering from this place to that and it is 

1036 
 



because of Lord's grace that I have arrived here." The king says: "Listening to 
her tale, I married her and we began to live in the temple. Every day we used 
to eat flesh and fruit. One day, under the intoxication of wine, we enjoyed our 
time greatly. We even began to dance forgetting our physical condition. 
Suddenly, agents of Yama arrived there and began to tighten their noose 
around us. Simultaneously, Sri Hari too sent His agents." Vishnu's agents say: 
"O imprudent Yamadoots! Release this great devotee of Lord Vishnu. 
Yamadoots say: "These are abject sinners. We will definitely take them with 
us." These words infuriated the agents of Vishnu. 
Vishnu's agents say: "They are not sinners. They are great devotees and the 
servers of Lord Vishnu. This woman has performed a dance while this man has 
installed a flag in the temple. 
Thus, their sins have been destroyed and they have now a right to the 
supreme abode. They have served this temple for the past thirty-two years." 
Saying this, the agents of Vishnu snapped the noose and carried us to the 
abode of Vishnu in a divine aircraft. Hearing this tale from the king Sumit, sage 
Vibhandak felt extreme joy and went to the forest. 
 
CHAPTER -  20  
DESCRIPTION OF HARIPANCHRATRA VRATA  
Sanatkumar says: O Narada! I am now narrating about another fast. It is 
Haripanchak fast and is rare in all the worlds. It destroys all the sorrows of the 
devotee, fulfills his all desires and helps him attain the four goals of life. It is 
observed for five days in the month of Margsheersh starting from the tenth 
day of the brighter phase till the full Moon day. On the first day, a day long 
fast is observed after worshipping Lord Vishnu in the morning. It is broken 
with a plain meal in the evening. 
Next day, Lord's idol is bathed with milk containing ghee, curd, honey and five 
types of dry fruits followed by usual worship. Vows of the fast are recited and 
prayers are made for their successful completion. That whole night and also 

1037 
 



the subsequent nights till full Moon night are passed reciting Lord's name and 
singing devotional songs. Bathing of Lord's idol with milk containing ghee, 
curd, honey and dry fruits continues in the morning everyday till full Moon 
day. 
On the full Moon day, Havan is performed with oblations of sesame seeds and 
donations. On the sixth day, the devotee must drink Panchgavya and worship 
Sri Hari, feed Brahmins and only then should take meal silently. This fast is 
observed every month till Kartik and closing rituals are taken up in the month 
of Margsheersh next year. During the closing rituals, the devotee should 
observe day long fast on the eleventh day and take only Panchgavya on the 
twelfth day. 
Thereafter he should worship Lord Vishnu, donate honey, ghee, fruits, kheer 
and an urn filled with water and containing five jewels to the Brahmin. He 
should then feed the Brahmins before himself taking any meal. 
O Narada! Those who observe this Haripanchak fast never return from 
Brahmaloka. Those who desire for salvation should essentially observe this 
fast. It destroys all the sins like a fire destroys a forest. Its virtues are equal to 
those of donating millions of cows. 
 
CHAPTER -  21  
DESCRIPTION OF THE FRUITS OF FAST 
Sanatkumar says:"Now I am narrating about an excellent fast for the benefit 
of the world. Listen to it carefully O Narada! This fast must be observed in the 
months of Ashadh, Shravan, Bhadrapad or Ashwin. On any day during the 
brighter phase of these months, the devotees must drink Panchgavya and 
pass his time in the vicinity of Lord Vishnu's idol. Then, reciting scriptures in 
the guidance of learned Brahmins, he should take a vow to observe a month 
long fast praying Lord Vishnu to protect him from any unforeseen crises. The 
devotee should since then pass his time in a temple for one month. Everyday, 
he should bathe the idol with milk containing ghee, curd, honey and dry fruits 

1038 
 



and light the lamps before the idol. He is also expected to pass his life in a 
natural way without using any artificial thing like toothpaste or soap. Then he 
should feed a Brahmin and give them Dakshaina. According to the provision of 
fast, the devotee should feed at least twelve Brahmins and donate jewelry. 
Virtues of this fast are enormous. A widow woman who has no son, ascetic, 
bachelor and Vanaprasthi should essentially observe this fast. 
 
CHAPTER -  22  
TALE OF BHADRASHEEL BRAHMIN 
Sanatkumar says: "O Narada! A fast on Ekadashi (eleventh day) in both the 
phases of a month pleases Sri Hari and fulfills all the desires. On the eleventh 
day of each phase, one should not dine. Those who dine on the eleventh day 
commit severe sins. Salvation from sins like killing a Brahmin is possible but 
there is no method to eliminate the sins incurred because of dining on the 
eleventh day. Brahmins should essentially observe fast on the eleventh day of 
each phase. 
The preparations for Ekadashi Vrata start on the tenth day. The devotee 
should worship Sri Hari in the morning with proper rituals and pass the night 
in the vicinity of the idol." On the eleventh day, the devotee should worship 
Sri Hari in the morning and take an oath to observe fast during the day and 
pray the Lord to protect him from calamities. The devotee must pass the night 
singing devotional songs, reciting scriptures and if possible dancing. In the 
morning of the twelfth day, he should worship Lord Vishnu as usual. Then he 
should feed Brahmins and make donations as per his powers. Performing five 
kinds of Yagyas, the devotee should break his fast in the last. During the 
period of fast, the devotee must not see wretched ones and desist from 
talking to such people who oppose Brahmins. 
As there is no pilgrimage place holier than the Ganges; no teacher greater 
than the Mother and no deity more virtuous than Lord Vishnu. Similarly there 

1039 
 



is no fast greater than Ekadashi Vrata is. O Narada! I am now narrating an old 
tale. Listen to it carefully. 
In the ancient times, a great sage Galav lived in the dense forest on the bank 
of the river Narmada. He was very peace loving and truth abiding in nature. 
The forest surrounding his hermitage was the playground for beautiful fauna, 
Yakshas, Gandharvas and Vidhyadhars. Sage Galav passed his time engaged in 
penance. Thus, he lived there for a long time. He had an equally virtuous son 
named Bhadrasheel who was a great devotee of Lord Vishnu and who knew 
everything about his previous birth. In his childhood, Bhadrasheel used to play 
with his friends but his plays reflected his religious sentiments. He would 
make an earthen idol of Lord Vishnu and worship it. He also would tell his 
friends to always worship Lord Vishnu and observe fast on the eleventh day of 
every phase in every month. His friends too followed him. During the worship, 
Bhadrasheel used to wish well for the entire world. His activities pleased the 
sage Galav very much. 
Galav says: "O fortunate one! You are really Bhadrasheel because even the 
Yogis rarely have a nature like yours. You always indulge in worship of Hari, 
benefit of all and observe fast on Ekadashi. You always abstain from forbidden 
work. How come, you acquired such a peaceful and unconflicting mind. I am 
very much pleased with you. Kindly tell me, about your achievements." 
Bhadrasheel says: "O father! I have some remembrance of my previous birth. 
During my previous birth, Yama had preached me about religion." These 
words surprised Galav. He says: "O fortunate one! Who were you in your 
previous birth? What did Yamaraj said to you and why?" Bhadrasheel says: "O 
great sage! I was a king in Soma dynasty. I had received knowledge from 
Dharmakeerti and Dattatreya. I ruled continuously for thousand years. During 
this period, I committed various religious as well as irreligious tasks. In the 
company of imposters, I too became an imposter. Working diplomatically, I 
destroyed Yagyas. My subjects also followed me and began to behave 
irreligiously. I received sixth part of their evil deeds. One day, I went to the 
forest hunting. There, I killed many animals. 

1040 
 



After a while, perplexed by thirst and hunger, I reached the bank of Narmada. 
I had strayed into deeper forests all alone. The intense sun was scorching my 
body. I was about to drop down because of hunger when I saw that people on 
the bank of Narmada were observing Ekadashi Vrata. I joined them and stayed 
awake all along the night without taking any food. But I could not bear the 
starvation and exertion and died as a result. Fierce looking Yamadoots took 
me to Yamaraj. Yamaraj asked Chitragupt to open the account of my life. 
Chitragupt thought for a moment and said: "Its true O Yamaraj that this 
person is a sinner. But now he is free from his sins due to observing fast on 
Ekadashi and passing his night in the company of pious devotees." Hearing 
these words, Yamaraj greeted me and worshipped me with devotion. Then, he 
called his servers." Yamaraj says: "Listen to me, O agents! I am narrating 
something to your interest. Never bring to me in future anybody who is 
engaged in religious task. Stay away from those who always recite the name 
of Sri Hari. Greet them from a distance. This is my order as well as teaching to 
all of you. Spare all those who serve their teachers, love their religion, are 
helpless, serve the pious one and are truly deserving. Bring all such people 
who abuse their mother, hate the world, steal the wealth of temples and 
Brahmins, who are killers, who do not observe fast on Ekadashi, who are short 
tempered, criticize me and nurture hostility with others." Hearing such words 
from Yamaraj, fire of penance began to burn within me. More intense this fire 
grew, more of my sins were destroyed. I acquired an appearance of Sri Hari. 
Even, Yamaraj greeted me with respect. His action even surprised the 
Yamadoots. Worshipping me, Yamaraj sent me on a divine aircraft to the 
abode of Vishnu. O father! I was passing my time happily. I did not know how 
and when crores of years passed. 
Then I arrived in Indraloka. There I stayed with the Gods for many Kalpas. It 
was after such a great experience that I have arrived on the earth. Having the 
knowledge of my previous birth, I always engaged in the worship of Hari and 
inspire others to follow suit. Earlier, I didn't know the virtues of Ekadashi 
Vrata. But now, because of the knowledge of my previous births, I have come 
to know about it. I observed it without any desire and without knowing that I 

1041 
 



was actually observing a fast and received so much in return. Hence, I cannot 
tell how much will one receive if he observes Ekadashi Vrata with some desire. 
Those who devotedly worship Sri Hari and observe Ekadashi Vrata attain even 
the supreme abode of Lord Vishnu." The words of his son gladdened sage 
Galav. He says- "My birth has been successful because I got such a devotee 
son like you who told me the complete method of worshipping Lord Vishnu." 
Home   
  

1042 
 



13. SKANDA PURANA  
I. MAHESHWAR KHAND  
DAKSHA'S ANIMOSITY TOWARDS LORD SHIVA  
Skanda Purana begins with the eulogy of Lord Shiva-- Yasyagya Jagat Srishta 
Viranchih Palko Harih; Sanharta Kalrudrakhyo Namastasmai Pinakine. 
(Meaning)--- Salutations to Lord Shankar who has entrusted the job of 
creation to Lord Brahma-- Who has instructed Lord Vishnu to nurture the 
world and who himself acts as the supreme annihilator. During ancient times, 
once, Sage Shaunak had performed a grand 'yagya' at his hermitage in 
Naimisharanya forest. Many sages had thronged Naimisharanya to attend it. 
One of them was Sage Lomesh. After the yagya was over, all the assembled 
Sages requested Sage Lomesh to narrate the divine tales of Lord Shiva. 
Sage Lomesh said--Daksha-Prajapati had got his daughter, Sati married to Lord 
Shiva.  
Once, he had performed a grand yagya in which he had invited everybody 
except his own son-in-law. 
When Sati learnt about the yagya, she sought Lord Shiva's permission to 
attend that yagya. Lord Shiva tried to convince her that it was not proper to 
attend a ceremony in which one had not been invited. But Sati did not pay any 
heed and was bent upon attending that yagya. Ultimately, Lord Shiva had no 
option but to give his conscent. But he did not forget to send his 'Rudraganas' 
with her for her protection. 
SATI JUMPS INTO THE SACRIFICIAL FIREWhen Sati reached her father's place, 
she saw a grand yagya being performed. A large number of people had been 
invited--the deities, the sages and the hermits. 
Sati became sad because Daksha had invited everybody except her husband. 
She knew quite well that it was a deliberate decision on part of her father, not 
to invite Lord Shiva. But, she got infuriated when she found that Daksha had 

1043 
 



not even kept Shiva's share in the yagya while the 'shares' of other deities had 
been kept. 
When Daksha saw Sati, he was enraged---How dare you come here? Your 
husband is an embodiment of inauspiciousness. He is the Lord of the spirits, 
ghosts and all types of mean powers. This was the reason why I did not invite 
him.' The insult heaped on her husband in front of everybody devastated Sati. 
She felt so humiliated that she decided to give up her life. Before any one 
could understand, she jumped into the sacrificial fire and was charred to 
death. All the deities present there were stunned by this sudden 
development. All the 'Rudraganas' mourned Sati's death with deep sorrow. 
Meanwhile, Lord Shiva got the sad news from Narada. He got mad with anger 
and uprooted some hair from his scalp. He then dashed the hair against a 
mountain. There was a thundering sound and Veerbhadra manifested within a 
split second. Lord Shiva ordered him to punish Daksha for his evil deed, which 
caused the death of Sati. Veerbhadra proceeded with a huge army of spirits, 
ghosts and marudganas to punish Daksha. When he reached the oblation site, 
Daksha and all the other deities became scarred. But, Sage Bhrigu came at the 
deities' rescue and told them not to worry. 
He then chanted few mantras, which helped the deities to win the first round 
of the battle. 
The defeat of his army enraged Veerbhadra to such an extent that he created 
havoc in the ranks of deities' army. He showered volleys of arrow on them, 
which forced the deities to make a hasty retreat from there. Veerbhadra 
dashed Sage Bhrigu against the ground and uprooted his beard. 
He then severed the head of Daksha and threw it in flames of sacrificial fire. 
Lord Brahma took the refuge of Lord Shiva and requested him to stop 
Veerbhadra from causing further death and destruction. Lord Shiva told 
Brahma--'Nobody else but Daksha himself was responsible for his death. But, 
Lord Brahma requested Lord Shiva to make Daksha alive once again. Lord 
Shiva then went to Daksha's place and fixed a goat's head on the trunk of 
Daksha's body. This way Daksha became alive once again albeit with a goats 

1044 
 



body. He was very ashamed of his behaviour and requested Lord Shiva to 
forgive him. Lord Shiva blessed him and said-- "Salvation can not be attained 
merely by performing the rituals. If you are desirous of salvation then engage 
yourself in virtuous deeds with."  
VIRTUES OF WORSHIPPING LORD SHIVA 
Sage Lomesh told the assembled sages--- One who brooms the courtyard of 
Shiva temple attains to Shiva loka. Those who make offerings of incense to 
Lord Shiva not only liberate himself from the bondage of this world but also 
both his 'Kulas'. One who gets constructed a Shiva temple or renovates it, 
attains incomparable virtue. One who chants the holy mantra 'Om Namah 
Shivay' daily and begins his day by visiting Shiva temple in the morning 
becomes absolved of all his sins. 
CHURNING OF THE OCEAN  
Sage Lomesh narrated the tale, which described how Indra lost heaven after 
he showed disrespect to Brihaspati--  
Once, Indra was enjoying the songs sung by Gandharvas when sage 
Vashishtha arrived. But, Indra was so engrossed in music, that he forgot to 
welcome his distinguished guest. Sage Vashishtha was enraged by his 
behaviour and went away fuming with anger. When the demon King Bali--the 
Lord of Patal loka, learnt about this incident he attacked Indraloka with a large 
army. A fierce battle took place in which all the deities were defeated. Bali and 
his army brought all the wealth to Patal-loka. But the demons were not 
destined to be the owner of this plundered wealth for too long as the whole 
wealth got submerged into the ocean. Bali was surprised and asked 
Shukracharya about the reason. Sage Shukracharya revealed to Bali that he 
could not enjoy the splendours of deities' wealth because he had not 
performed 100 Ashwamedha yagyas. 
The deities, after being defeated went to seek Lord Vishnu's help. Lord 
Brahma was also present with them. After giving a deep thought to the whole 
issue, Lord Vishnu advised them to patch up with the demons so that all the 

1045 
 



wealth could be retrieved from the ocean bed. The deities went to Patal-loka 
and convinced the demons to participate in the churning of the ocean. When 
the process of churning of the ocean began, Mandarachal mountain was used 
as a churner and the serpent -Vasuki as the rope. Both the parties immersed 
the Mandarachal mountain into the ocean but it sank down, as there was no 
base upon which it could be placed. So, Lord Vishnu took the form of a 
tortoise and held the mountain on his back. 
Churning of the ocean resulted into the emergence of many things like 
Chandrama, Surabhi (cow), Kalpa tree, Kaustubh, Uchchaihshrava (Horse), 
Eravat (elephant), Goddess Lakshmi, poison, ambrosia, intoxication etc.When 
poison emerged from the sea bed, neither the deities nor the demons made 
any claim for it. The poison was so venomous that the whole world started 
getting inflamed by it. Lord Shiva then drank the Halahal poison and thus the 
world was saved. 
Lord Vishnu accepted Goddess Lakshmi as his consort. 
THE EMERGENCE OF AMBROSIA  
When Dhanvantri appeared with a pot of ambrosia in his hands, a demon 
named Vrishparva snatched it from him. All the demons then fled to Patal loka 
with the pot of ambrosia. Lord Vishnu disguised himself as an enchanting 
beauty and went to Patal loka. There, he found all the demons quarrelling 
among themselves. Each of them wanted to have his own share of ambrosia. 
The demons were stunned by Mohini's beauty the moment they saw Lord 
Vishnu in the form of a beautiful lady. Mohini took control of the ambrosia pot 
and summoned the deities to Patal loka. 
All the deities and demons were made to sit in separate rows. Mohini then 
started distributing ambrosia to the deities. A demon named Rahu, who had 
disguised himself as a deity was also sitting among the deities. Hardly had 
Rahu gulped down some ambrosia then Mohini severed his head on the 
information given by chandrama (Moon). The severed head of Rahu tried to 
take revenge by swallowing chandrama, who took the refuge of Lord Shiva. 

1046 
 



Shiva kept chandrama within the lock of his hair. Meanwhile, Rahu too came 
chasing chandrama and Lord Shiva wore his head as a garland in his neck. 
LORD BRAHMA'S BOON TO TARAKASUR  
After the death of Sati, Lord Shiva became aloof and engaged himself in an 
austere penance. His lack of interest in performing his duties resulted into the 
predominance of sin in the world. A demon named Tarakasur had received a 
boon of invincibility from Lord Brahma. Only a child and nobody else could kill 
him. Tarakasur, being drunk with power started to torment the deities. 
All the deities eulogized Lord Brahma and they heard a heavenly voice saying--
- 'Nobody can kill Tarakasur except Shiva's son. So you must put all your 
efforts to help Shiva get married.' The deities were aware that after the death 
of Sati, Shiva had lost all interest in life and was living like a recluse. 
Nevertheless, they wanted to give a try. So they went to Himalaya, who had 
no progeny at that time and requested him to beget a girl. Himalaya agreed, 
as he was aware of the misdeeds of Tarakasur.In course of time, Himalaya's 
wife, Mena gave birth to a girl child who was in fact the reincarnation of Sati. 
The girl child was named Girija. Girija was brought up with great love and care. 
When she attained the age of eight, Himalaya once took her to the cave 
where Lord Shiva was doing penance. Initially, Shiva was little hesitant to 
meet Himalaya because Girija was accompanying her father and he had 
vowed never to put his glance on any woman after the death of Sati. But, 
Later on he relented and allowed both of them to meet him whenever they 
liked. Now, Girija made it her habit to visit Lord Shiva regularly. She used to 
look after all the needs of Shiva while he was engrossed in his penance. 
Even after the passage of a long time the deities' wishes did not look like 
getting fulfilled, as Shiva remained as nonchalant as ever. So, the deities 
requested Kamadeva's help in sowing the seeds of love and passion in Shiva's 
heart. Kamadeva went to the place where Lord Shiva was doing his penance. 
He tried to sow seeds of compassion in Shiva's heart only to receive his wrath. 
Lord Shiva was infuriated by the efforts of Kamadeva. He opened his third eye 
as the result of which Kamadeva was charred to death. Rati started wailing 

1047 
 



inconsolably at the death of her husband but Girija assured her that she would 
try to bring Kamadeva back to life. Girija commenced her penance to please 
Lord Shiva. There was a great turmoil in the world on account of her penance. 
Lord Vishnu led the deities to Shiva and requested him to marry Girija so that 
the world could be protected from the torments of Tarakasur. Finally, Shiva 
gave his conscent and went to the place where Girija was doing penance. 
SHIVA TEST'S PARVATI'S DEVOTION  
After reaching there, Lord Shiva found Parvati engrossed in her penance. 
Parvati was surrounded by her few trusted companions.Lord Shiva decided to 
test Parvati's devotion towards him. So he disguised himself as a hermit and 
asked her companions about the reason why Parvati was doing such a severe 
Penance. Jaya, one of Parvati's companions informed him that her friend was 
doing penance in order to get Lord Shiva as her husband. Jaya also informed 
Lord Shiva that her friend Girija was the daughter of Himalaya. 
Lord Shiva, who was in the guise of a hermit said---'Why is this tender girl so 
eager to marry Shiva who is an embodiment of inauspiciousness--who carries 
a skull in his hand and who lives in a crematorium. How can your friend think 
of marrying one who has been expelled by Daksha from the yagya ceremony? 
Does your friend know that Shiva wears a snake around his neck and is 
surrounded by numerous spirits and ghosts?' Parvati, who had been listening 
to all those nonsensical utterances, told Jaya---'This fellow seems to abhor 
Shiva. We should not talk to this evil person. Tell him to leave at once.' Lord 
Shiva was extremely pleased by Parvati's unwavering devotion towards him. 
He appeared in his original form and said--'You can ask for anything you wish.' 
But Parvati replied--- 'O Supreme Lord! I am the same Sati for the sake of 
whom you had destroyed Daksha's yagya. Don't you recognize me? There is a 
great purpose behind my reincarnation. A son born to us would kill Tarakasur. 
So go to my father and request for my hand in marriage.'But Lord Shiva 
refused to make a request to Himalaya considering it as an undignified act. He 
then returned to the place where he had been meditating.After a while, 

1048 
 



Himalaya and Mena arrived there and asked Parvati how her penance had 
been progressing. 
Parvati narrated the whole incident how Lord Shiva had finally given his 
conscent to marry her.Himalaya and Mena were extremely pleased by this 
good news. 
THE ARRIVAL OF 'SAPTARISHIS'  
Later on Lord Shiva sent the SaptaRishis with the proposal of marriage to 
Himalaya. Himalaya received his distinguished guests with respect and 
enquired about the purpose of their visit. The SaptaRishis replied--'We have 
come to request you to give your daughter's hand in marriage to Shiva.' After 
consulting his wife, Mena and other mountains, Himalaya agreed to accept 
Shiva as his son-in-law. The SaptaRishis then returned and conveyed the good 
news to Shiva.The preparation for marriage ceremony started being made. 
Finally the marriage procession proceeded towards the bride's home. The 
marriage procession consisted of all the deities, apsaras, gandharvas even 
spirits and ghosts. 
Sage Garg supervised the rituals of marriage ceremony. Vishwakarma 
constructed the canopy, where marriage ceremony was supposed to take 
place. After the marriage was over, Himalaya performed the ritual of 
Kanyadan and this way Shiva returned with his consort. 
BIRTH OF KARTIKEYA  
Lord Shiva and Parvati lived happily at Gandhamadan Mountain enjoying 
every bit of their conjugal life.  
Once it so happened that a small quantity of Shiva's sperm fell on the ground 
while he was enjoying intimate moments with Parvati. As a result, 
tremendous amount of heat was generated and the whole world started 
burning. Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu instructed Agni to employ some means 
so that the destruction caused by Shiva's over flowing sperms could come to 
an end.Agni went to Gandhamadan mountain in the guise of a hermit. He 
requested Parvati by saying---'O Mother! Please give me something as alms. I 

1049 
 



have nothing but my hands as a begging bowl' Parvati kept Shiva's sperms on 
his palm, which was eaten up by Agni. Parvati was enraged to see this and 
cursed Agni--"You have shown disrespect to me. From today onwards you 
would become omnivorous. The sperms which you have devoured would 
cause unbearable inflammation in your body." As the result of Parvati's curse, 
Agni really started experiencing unbearable inflammation in his body. He 
requested Lord Shiva to reveal the means by which his pain would come to an 
end. 
Lord Shiva instructed Agni to implant those sperms in any woman's womb to 
get rid of the unbearable inflammation. Thus, Agni, who was suffering from 
extreme heat that generated in his body, sat at a lonely place waiting eagerly 
for a woman to arrive there. He did not have to wait for too long, as six 
Kritikas, shivering with cold arrived there to warm themselves. The sperms of 
Shiva entered into their bodies through the pores. These six Kritikas became 
pregnant. 
When their respective husbands learnt about their pregnancy they cursed 
them. As a result they got transformed into 'Nakshatras' and established 
themselves in the sky. But, they aborted their respective foetus at Himalaya 
mountain before getting transformed into six constellations. The holy Ganges 
carried that foetus to a secluded place, which was covered with dense bushes 
of reeds. In course of time, Lord Kartikeya manifested from those reed bushes. 
He had six heads. 
The deities were delighted at the birth of Kartikeya. Lord Shiva along with 
Parvati went to the place where Kartikeya had incarnated. Parvati took young 
Kartikeya in her embrace. 
KARTIKEYA KILLS TARAKASUR  
Lord Shiva assured the deities, who were also present there that Tarakasur's 
days were numbered. The deities's army then proceeded towards the 
battlefield. On their way, the deities heard a heavenly voice--'You can defeat 
the demons only if you fight under the leadership of Kartikeya.' Now all the 

1050 
 



deities requested Kartikeya to become their leader. Menawhile, Devasena--
the daughter of Mrityu arrived there and requested Kartikeya to become her 
husband. Kartikeya accepted Devasena as his wife. This is the reason why he is 
also known as Deva senapati. 
Karitkeya was leading the deities' army, mounted on an elephant. The army 
had all the deities in its rank- Indra, Varuna, Vayu, Kuber, Dharma Raj, etc. 
Both the rival armies met at an island situated between Ganga and Yamuna. 
Tarakasur had come with a large army, which boasted of many brave and 
mighty warriors. 
The battle commenced and the first phase was dominated by the demons. The 
deities could not stand up to the might of demons. Even Indra was severely 
wounded when Tarakasur attacked him with his deadly weapon- 'Shakti'. On 
seeing the level of destruction caused in the deities' army, King Muchkunda, 
who was on the side of the deities' attacked Tarakasur. In the ensuing battle 
Muchkunda got injured and fell down on the ground. He got up furiously and 
tried to kill Tarakasur with his Brahmashtra. Sage Narada told him that 
Brahmashtra would be of no use as Tarakasur had been blessed with 
invincibility against mortals. Narada said--'Only Kartikeya is capable of killing 
Tarakasur. So, you all need to have patience till Kartikeya accomplishes his 
mission.' Meanwhile Veerabhadra was fighting a dual bought against 
Tarakasur. He had already caused indescribable losses to the demons. While 
the fight was going on, Tarakasur realized that it was not easy to defeat him. 
So, he decided to use his illusionary powers, which helped him in acquiring ten 
thousand hands. The deities ran away from the battle field, when they saw 
ferocious Tarakasur approaching them.Lord Vishnu instructed Kartikeya to kill 
Tarakasur before it was too late. Kartikeya chased Tarakasur with his deadly 
weapon- Shakti in his hand. A fierce fight took place between both of them. 
Kartikeya attacked Tarakasur with his Shakti. Tarakasur retaliated by hitting 
him with his own Shakti. The assault was so severe that Karikeya lost his 
consciousness for few moments. 

1051 
 



When Kartikeya regained his consciousness, he got up quickly to fight against 
Tarakasur.  
Once again a fierce battle commenced. Kartikeya remembered his parents in 
reverence and released his Shakti in the direction of Tarakasur. Tarakasur died 
instantly. The deities were delighted at the death of their tormentor. 
VIRTUES OF OBSERVING FAST ON 'SHIVARATRI'  
Sage Lomesh eulogizes the virtues of Shivaratri in the following words--'The 
fourteenth day of the dark half of a month is dedicated to the worship of Lord 
Shiva and is famously known as 'Shivaratri'. It destroys all the sins committed 
by a man. Sage Lomesh then narrated a tale, which emphasized the greatness 
of Shivaratri--  
Once upon a time a Brahmin widow developed an illicit relationship with a 
'Chandal' (a low caste man). Later on she gave birth to a son who was named 
Dussah. Her son had all the bad qualities one can think of-- a gambler, a 
drunker, a thief, a murderer, etc. 
One day, Dussah went to a Shiva temple with the intention of committing 
robbery. It was the festive night of Shivaratri and people had thronged the 
temple in a large number. So, he did not get an opportunity to steal temple 
property. He remained awakened for the whole night waiting for an 
opportune moment but his wishes remained unfulfilled. He spent his time 
listening to the divine tales of Lord Shiva that was being narrated by the 
temple priest. Though he was a sinner yet he took his next birth in a royal 
family on account of his two virtuous deeds--he had remained awakened for 
the whole night of Shivaratri and he had listened to the tales of Shiva. In his 
next birth, he was born to a king named Chitrangad and he himself was named 
Vichitraveerya. Vichitraveerya was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. He 
ultimately united with Lord Shiva and manifested as Veerabhadra at the time 
when Lord Shiva had shaken his head violently after hearing the sad news of 
Sati's demise. There are numerous instances of people attaining salvation by 

1052 
 



observing a fast on Shivaratri. The names of some great devotees to do so are 
King Bharata, Mandhata, Dhundhumar, Harishchandra etc. 
KARTIKEYA'S SORROW 
While the deities hailed the glory of Kartikeya for having killed Tarakasur, 
Kartikeya himself was saddened by his act. He told the deities--'I regret for 
having killed Tarakasur because he was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. Is there 
any way to atone for my sin?' Lord Vishnu consoled him---'Killing a wicked 
person, who nourishes himself on the blood of innocent people, is not a sinful 
deed. But, still, if you feel guilty then there is no better way to atone for your 
sin than worshipping Lord Shiva. Install Shivalingas and worship them with 
deep devotion.' Kartikeya instructed Vishnukarma to make three divine 
Shivalingas. Later on Kartikeya installed these Shivalingas at three different 
places and worshipped them with appropriate rituals. In course of time these 
three holy places came to be known as Pratigyeshwar, Kapaleshwar and 
Kumareshwar. Kartikeya, while worshipping at Kapaleshwar sprinkled holy 
water on the Shivalinga and prayed so that Tarakasur's soul rested in peace. 
He also offered sesame seeds to Lord Kapaleshwar and prayed --'May my 
offerings made in the form of sesame seeds reach Tarak--the descendant of 
Sage Kashyap.' This way, Kartikeya was absolved of his sins. 
KILLING OF PRALAMB  
A demon named Pralamb had escaped unharmed in the battle fought 
between the deities and demons. As the deities were busy installing 
Shivalingas at different places, Pralamb started to torment their families in 
their absence. The deities got this information from Kumud who appeared at 
the time when the deities were digging up a reservoir near 'Siddheshwar' 
temple. All the deities requested Kartikeya to do something. Kartikeya 
released his fiery weapon, Shakti in the direction of Pralamb. Shakti pierced 
the heart of earth and went right up to Patal loka where Pralamb lived with 
the surviving demons. All the demons were killed within few moments. 

1053 
 



A long tunnel had been created as the impact of Shakti's penetration of the 
earth. This tunnel was later on filled up with the water of Patal Ganga and 
became famous as 'Siddha-koopa.'  
KALBHITI'S AUSTERE PENANCE  
There is an amazing tale related with the birth of Kalbhiti. During ancient 
times there lived a sonless Brahmin named Manti in Kashi. He did an austere 
penance to get a son. At last, Lord Shiva became pleased by his devotion and 
appeared. Lord Shiva said--'You will be blessed with an enlightened son who 
would liberate your whole clan.' In course of time Manti's wife became 
pregnant but amazingly did not deliver a baby even after a long time. Four 
years passed like this but Manti's wife did not deliver the child. Manti was 
perplexed by this unusual event so he asked the baby, who was still in his 
mother's womb as to why he was hesitant to come out. The child replied that 
he feared 'Kal' and this was the reason why he was not taking birth. The child 
said--'If you can assure me of protection from 'Kal' then I shall certainly take 
birth.' How could have Manti given such an assurance. So he took refuge in 
Lord Shiva.Lord Shiva ordered four of his ganas to go and convince the baby. 
The names of these five ganas were Dharma, Gyan, Vairagya Aishwarya and 
Adharma. They assured the baby by saying--'Get rid of your fear. We assure 
you that each four of us (Dharma, Gyan, Vairagya and Aishwarya) will never 
abandon you." The fifth gana named Adharma on the contrary promised not 
to caste his evil Shadow on the baby. These assurances were enough for the 
baby to come out from the womb. But, even after taking birth the child was 
trembling and wailing in fear.The ganas said--Manti! Your child is still fearful of 
the Kal. He is trembling and crying inspite of the best of our efforts to drive 
away is fears. So he will become famous as Kalbhiti (one who is fearful of Kal). 
Kalbhiti grew up to be a virtuous person. He used to engage himself in various 
kinds of austerities. He was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. One day, as Kalbhiti 
was meditating under a 'bael' tree (wood apple), he went into his trance. The 
joy experienced during trance period was something, which he had never 
experienced before. He decided to regularly meditate under that tree. He did 

1054 
 



penance for one hundred years standing on his toe. Lord Shiva became 
pleased by his devotion and appeared in the guise of a human being. Lord 
Shiva said--'O Great soul Please discontinue with your penance. I have brought 
some water for you! Please quench your thirst!' But Kalbhiti refused to take 
water from an unknown person. He requested Lord Shiva to reveal his 
identity. Kalbhiti also inquired Lord Shiva about his religion and conduct. Lord 
Shiva told him that he was beyond any religion or conduct.When Kalbhiti 
refused to have water, Lord Shiva dug up a large pit and emptied the pot into 
it. After that he disappeared. Kalbheeti stood fixed at that place, being 
stunned by the disappearance of Lord Shiva. Suddenly, an effulgent Shivalinga 
appeared under that bael (wood apple) tree. Kalbheeti worshipped that 
Shivalinga which was radiating light in all directions. Now, Lord Shiva appeared 
and blessed Kalbheeti to become free from the fear of Kal (Death). From that 
day onwards the Shivalinga situated there became famous as Mahakal. Before 
disappearing once again, Lord Shiva instructed Kalbheeti to preach Sage 
Karandham who was expected to visit him shortly. Kalbheeti himself became 
renowned as Mahakal because he had been successful in conquering death. 
KARANDHAM'S QUERIES  
As predicted by Lord Shiva, king Karandham arrived at the place where 
Mahakal (Kalbheeti) was staying. First of all he worshipped Lord Mahakal and 
subsequently went to meet Sage Mahakal (previously Kalbheeti). King 
Karandham had numerous doubts regarding the rituals of Shraddh so he 
asked Mahakal--'How does the rituals related to 'tarpan' satisfy the dead 
ancestors?' Mahakal replied--The souls of dead ancestors are capable of 
accepting whatever is offered to them. Time and distance does not matter to 
them. They accept only the essence of whatever is offered to them and not 
the gross materials as such. Karandham posed his second query--'I think a 
soul, after it has abandoned the mortal body is bound by its own karma. Then, 
how, can the dead ancestors be expected of giving us blessings and changing 
our fortunes.' Mahakal replied---Not all Pitras (dead ancestors) are bound by 

1055 
 



their karma. Pitras belonging to different classes like deities, 'asuras' and 
'yaksha' are unembodied and formless (amurta). 
Similarly, the dead ancestors of all the four castes are called 'murta Pitras' 
(with form). These seven types of Pitras are considered to be eternal and 
powerful. They also transcend the law of Karma. A total number of 31 ganas 
are subordinate to them. The rituals of Shraddh are performed for the 
pacification of these seven eternal Pitras. These seven Pitras are the ones who 
shower blessings on the performers of Shraddh rituals.' Karandham's next 
question was--'Some people are of the view that one can attain salvation only 
by taking refuge in Lord Vishnu. While some think that only Lord Brahma is 
capable of giving salvation. There are many people who consider Lord Shiva as 
the supreme liberator. What do you have to say on this?' Mahakal replied--
'God is one. The three deities you have named even they eulogize each other. 
It is nothing but foolishness to grade them as superior, average or inferior. The 
thing, which matters most in the path of salvation, is individual's unflinching 
faith and devotion. Any deity in whom he has total devotion is capable of 
giving salvation. Karandham then requested Mahakal to describe the 
appropriate rituals related with the worship of Lord Shiva. 
Mahakal replied---A devotee who puts on 'tripund' mark on his forehead, 
chest and both the shoulders while worshipping Lord Shiva is blessed to see 
the divine appearance of Lord Shiva. 
He should enter the temple premise with a pure heart. After entering the 
temple he should purify the Shivalinga by removing all the unnecessary 
articles which may be lying there. He should then fill up four 'Garuas' (drinking 
pot with a curved spout) with water. Articles like milk, curd clarified butter, 
honey and sugarcane juice are kept to the left side of Shivalinga. The devotee 
should then come out of the temple and worship the 'dwarpalas'. After that, 
deities like Kuldevta, Nandi, Mahakal Dhata and Vidhata are worshipped. 
Once again he should enter the temple and sit in front of the Shivalinga and 
meditate on Lord Shiva. While performing 'ardhya' he should make offerings 
of articles like water, akshat, kusha grass, sandalwood, flowers, mustard 

1056 
 



seeds, milk, curd and honey. Having offered ardhya, a devotee should perform 
the ritual of ablution with water, milk, curd, honey, clarified butter, and 
sugarcane juice in the given order. 
While performing this ritual the devotee should also offer dhupa (incense) and 
chant 'Om Hoom Vishvamurtaye Namah'. 
Some other deities whom a devotee must worship along with the worship of 
Lord Shiva are Ishan, Tatpurush, Sadryojat etc. A devotee must also not forget 
to worship Shiva's trident. While doing this he should chant-- Trishul Dhanuh 
Khadga Kapal Kutharebhyo Namah. 
A devotee should conclude his worship by begging for Lord Shiva's forgiveness 
for any mistake that he might have committed while performing the rituals. 
ARUNACHAL SHIVALINGA  
Once, Sutji had gone to Naimisharanya. All the sages residing there asked him 
about the manifestation of Arunachal Shivalinga. Sutji recounted a tale when 
Sage Sanak had posed the same query to Lord Brahma -- 'Lord Brahma had 
told Sanak- Son, once Lord Vishnu and I witnessed an effulgent pillar. It had 
manifested from nowhere and was limitless in size. Its radiance put the whole 
world ablaze. Both of us worshipped that marvelous pillar by chanting vedic 
mantras.' Actually, that effulgent pillar was a Shivalinga. Lord Shiva manifested 
from it after being pleased by our devotion. We requested him to minimize his 
size and establish himself in the form of Arunachal Shivalinga.' 'Lord Shiva 
agreed to minimize his size as well as his effulgence by establishing himself in 
the form of 'Arunachaleshwar'. The holy place of Arunachaleshwar remains 
untouched while the whole world gets submerged in water at the time of 
deluge. 
LORD SHIVA--THE SOVEREIGN CREATOR  
The sages then asked Sutji how Lord Shiva had created the universe. 
Sutji replied---Lord Shiva commenced creation by his own will. Vishnu 
manifested from the left side of his body while Brahma from the right side. He 
then attributed the qualities of 'Rajas' and 'Satva' to Brahma and Vishnu 

1057 
 



respectively. From then onwards Lord Brahma took the responsibility of 
further creation and Lord Vishnu became the preserver of the world. Later on 
Lord Brahma created his ten Manasputras (Marichi etc,) by his will and Daksha 
Prajapati from his right thumb. He also created the Brahmins from his mouth, 
Kshatriyas from both his arms, Vaishyas from both his thighs and Shudras 
from both his feet respectively. Both, the deities and demons came from the 
lineage of Sage Kashyap, who himself was Marichi's son. Not only that 
Kashyap also fathered different species like Marut, Nag, Yaksha, Gandharva 
and Apsaras. 
Similarly, Lord Brahma had also created Manu who is believed to be the 
person from whom human race originated. All the sages as well as the 
Kshatriyas are the descendants of Sage Atri. 
Yakshas originated from Pulastya whereas Rakshashas were the descendants 
of Pulah. Agni as well as Sages like Chyavan was the descendant of Bhrigu. 
Many famous sages came from the lineage of Vashishtha. These are the 
names of few prominent sages, whose descendants have populated the earth. 
Thus, Lord Shiva is the Sovereign creator because he created Brahma--the 
creator. 
EXECUTION OF SHUMBH NISHUMBH AND MAHISHASUR  
The demons named Shumbh and Nishumbh had received boons from Brahma 
according to which no deity, demon or Man could kill him. Shumbh and 
Nishumbh became excessively arrogant and started tormenting the deities. All 
the deities including Lord Vishnu went to Lord Shiva and requested for his 
help. Lord Shiva assured them that both the demons would be killed at the 
opportune time. The deities were satisfied and returned back to their 
respective abodes. 
Parvati was of dark complexion. She thought that Shiva would be more 
affectionate towards her if she somehow discarded her dark skin. She 
eventually discarded her dark skin at a place and it instantly got transformed 
into 'Kali Kaushiki'. She then did an austere penance at Vindhyachal mountain. 

1058 
 



At that time, Shumbh and Nishumbh lived there. When both the demons saw 
Goddess Kali Kaushiki her divine beauty infatuated them. But Goddess Kali 
Kaushiki ultimately killed both of them. 
Having accomplished her mission, Kali Kaushiki did a tremendous penance at 
'Gauri-peak' and regained her fair complexion. In course of time she became 
the mother of Ganesh and Kartikeya. 
Once, Goddess Parvati went to Arunachal mountain where Sage Gautam was 
doing penance. She was so enchanted by the scenery over there that she 
decided to do penance. She instructed Goddess Durga to stand guard till she 
accomplished her penance. She also ordered the two Goddesses Subhaga and 
Dhundhukumari to keep a watch in all directions. 
Mahishasur--the demon sent a female messenger to convince Parvati into 
marrying him. The female messenger disguised herself as a female hermit and 
tried to impress all the three Goddess who were keeping surveillance by 
praising the glory of Mahishasur-- 'O beautiful ladies! Why is your mistress 
living in such a secluded place? She is worthy of living in a royal palace. There 
is nobody among the deities who is fit enough to marry her. But, Mahishasur--
the Lord of all the three worlds is certainly fit to become her husband.'But all 
the three Goddesses drove the female messenger away. Ultimately, 
Mahishasur came accompanied by a large army to forcibly abduct Goddess 
Parvati. The commotion caused by the demons disturbed Parvati's meditation. 
She instructed Durga to kill all the demons. Goddess Durga transformed her 
appearance. Now she looked ferocious in her new appearance. She was well 
equipped with all sort of lethal weapons and was mounted on a lion. She 
thundered loudly and challenged Mahishasur. Countless 'yoginis' manifested 
from her body. These yoginis attacked Mahishasur's army and killed many 
demons. The whole battlefield was splashed with blood. 
Goddess Chamunda (Durga) severed the heads of 'Chand' and 'Mund' with her 
chakra. 

1059 
 



Mahishasur was enraged and he attacked Goddess Durga. Some other 
demons like Prachanda, Chamar, Mahamauli, Mahahanu, Ugravaktra, 
Vikataksha and Dahan also came forward to help him but each one of them 
was killed by Goddess Durga. Now, Mahishasur's anger crossed all limits and 
he menacingly ran towards Goddess Durga. A severe battle was fought 
between both of them. When Mahishasur realized that the Goddess was 
dominating the battle, he started changing his guises frequently. He tried to 
dodge Goddess Durga by transforming his appearance into that of a boar. But, 
Goddess Durga kept on chasing him. Then, Mahishasur became a lion. 
This way he kept on changing his appearances frequently to avoid getting 
killed by Goddess Durga.  
Once he transformed himself into a buffalo but Goddess Durga attacked him. 
This way, Mahishasur was forced to change his appearance frequently on 
account of relentless attack by Goddess Durga. Ultimately Durga killed him. 
Goddess Durga picked up his severed head and danced in joy. The deities 
were relieved at the death of Mahishasur. 
PARVATI RECEIVES ARUNCHALESHWAR'S GRACE  
Goddess Durga then went to the place where Goddess Parvati was still doing 
penance. She held Mahishasur's head in one hand and a sword in the other. 
Goddess Parvati said---'O Vindhyavasini! You have accomplished an impossible 
act. If it were not for you I would not have been able to accomplish my own 
penance. Now, you should get rid of this skull and create a holy spring bathing 
in which would destroy your sin acquired by killing Mahishasur.' Goddess 
Durga hit ferociously at a huge rock breaking it into pieces. A large pit was 
created which was soon filled up with underground water. She then took her 
bath in it by chanting Namah Shonadrinathay. 
In the meantime, an amazing incident took place. While Goddess Durga was 
taking her bath with Mahishasur's skull in her hand, a Shivalinga, which was 
struck in Mahishasur's throat fell down. This Shivalinga later on became 
famous as 'Papanashan Shivalinga'. She then released the skull and came out 

1060 
 



from the pond. Arunachaleshwar (Lord Shiva) became pleased by Parvati's 
devotion and appeared before her. Lord Arunachaleshwar then made Parvati 
to sit by his left side. The next moment Parvati's identity mingled with that of 
Lord Arunachaleshwar. The place where this incident took place, there is 
situated a grand temple of Goddess Apitastani and Lord Arunachaleshwar. 
 
II. VAISHNAV KHAND –‘Vishnu’s section’ 
LORD VARAHA SATISFIES PRITHVI'S CURIOSITY  
Sutji then narrated the tale of Lord Varaha to the sages, which he had heard 
from Sage Vyasa---  
Once, while Narada was wandering about, he reached Meru mountain where 
he saw the abode of Lord Brahma. He also saw a giant sized entity, just next to 
Brahma's abode. The person possessed four arms and his face resembled a 
boar. The person held a conch and a chakra in his two hands--The remaining 
two hands were in the postures of giving blessings. Narada was very surprised 
to see that divine person being surrounded by Sages like Vashishtha, Atri, 
Markandeya and Bhrigu. After paying his eulogy to him, he stood in a corner. 
In the meantime, Prithvi (earth) arrived there with her two companions--Ila 
and Pingla. She was curious to know about the identities of various 
mountains, which Lord Varaha had established on her. Lord Varaha told 
Prithvi about the prominent mountains---Mountains like Sumeru, Himavan, 
Mandarachal, Vindhyachal, Pariyatrak, Mahendra, Malay, Sinhachal and 
Gandhamadan are situated to the north of Himalaya. 
The mountain ranges situated to the south of Himalaya are Arunachal, Hasti, 
Gridhachal and Ghatikachal. Sages believe that in Satyayuga Lord Vishnu had 
his abode at Anjan Mountain, while in Treta yuga, Dwapar yuga and Kali yuga 
he has his abode at Narayangiri, Sinhachal and Shrivenketachal respectively. 
Lord Varaha and Prithvi flew away towards Venkatachalgiri mounted on 
Garuda. 
LORD VARAHA MANTRA  

1061 
 



On their way, Prithvi requested Lord Varaha to reveal the sacred mantra, 
chanting of which makes him pleased. 
Lord Varaha said--'The secret mantra that pleases me to no limits is ---Om 
Naham Shrivarahay Dharanyu Uddharnay Swaha. This mantra is capable of 
liberating a man and also brings all sort of worldly accomplishments to him. In 
the first Krita yuga, a Manu named Dharma had realized me by continuously 
chanting this mantra. Even Indra regained the control of heaven by chanting 
it. Anant--the Lord of all serpents, chanted Varaha mantra and as a result 
became capable of holding the earth on it's hood.'  
MANIFESTATION OF PADMAVATI  
Lord Varaha then narrated the tale of Padmavati's manifestation to Prithvi. He 
also revealed to her that Padmavati was the reincarnation of Vedavati and had 
manifested so that she could become his (Vishnu) consort.Lord Varaha said--- 
Once upon a time there lived an emperor named Akash. One day he ordered 
his men to get the land situated at the bank of Arani ploughed so that a grand 
yagya could be organized there. As the land was being cultivated, the plough 
suddenly struck against something. People ploughing the field dug up that 
place and were surprised to find an infant girl, crying loudly. The news of girls' 
manifestation spread like a wild fire. The emperor became extremely happy 
since he had no progeny. He brought up that child as his own daughter. 
This way the baby girl was brought up like a princess. She was named 
Padmavati. Padmavati proved very lucky for the emperor, as the emperor, 
who was still sonless till then was blessed with a son. This male child was 
named Vasudan. 
One day, Narada visited the palace and met both the children. He was 
impressed by Vasudan's intelligence but Padmavati appeared to be shy and 
absorbed in her own thoughts. Narada lovingly called her and instructed her 
to spread her left palm. Narada was amazed to find signs, which predicted 
Padmavati's marriage to Lord Vishnu. Everybody living in the palace became 
happy after getting this news. Narada then went away. 

1062 
 



PADMAVATI BECOMES LORD HARI'S CONSORT  
Continuing with the tale, Lord Varaha said-- One day, while Padmavati and her 
companions were playing in the garden, they saw an equestrian approaching 
them. He held a bow and arrows in both his hands. The stranger asked all the 
girls whether they had seen a wolf. Apparently the stranger was on his 
hunting spree. Padmavati angrily reminded the stranger that hunting was 
strictly prohibited in that area and hence he should go back home. The 
stranger was stunned by Padmavati's beauty and said--'I am Ananta from 
Venketachal mountain. People also call me Veerpati. Can I have this beautiful 
lady as my wife.' Padmavati's companions angrily rebuffed Anant who then 
galloped back on his horse. These unfortunate girls were unable to recognize 
Lord Vishnu who had come disguised as Anant. After reaching his palace, 
Anant found it very difficult to concentrate on his work. His mind was 
occupied by the thoughts of Padmavati. One day, while he was sitting in a 
thoughtful mood, Vakulmalika (a maid servant) arrived there and requested 
him to come down for lunch. But, Sri Hari (Anant) was lost in the thoughts of 
Padmavati. On being asked by Vakulmalika, Sri Hari narrated the following tale 
to her --- In Treta yuga, when I had incarnated as Ram, Ravan had deceitfully 
abducted my consort--Sita. 
But fortunately she was not Sita but Agni's consort Swaha. Before this incident 
could occur, Agni had already taken Sita to Patalloka and kept his own wife 
'Swaha' in her place. Indra's act had special purpose behind it--to avenge 
Swaha's death, who was Vedavati in her previous birth and who had 
committed suicide after being touched by the same demon. Actually, Agni's 
consort 'Swaha' was 'Vedavati' in her previous birth. So, in reality Ravan had 
abducted Vedavati instead of Sita. Later on, I thanked Agni and promised him 
that I would make Vedavati my consort in Kali yuga. The same Vedavati has 
taken birth as Padmavati. You must go and convince Padmavati to become my 
consort. Vakulmalika went to Narayanpur and informed the king about Sri 
Hari's desire. Emperor Akash was extremely delighted at the prospect of 

1063 
 



having Sri Hari as his son-in-law. An auspicious day was chosen for the 
marriage and thus, Lord Sri Hari got Padmavati as his consort. 
KING PARIKSHIT  
Once, Sutji narrated the tale of king Parikshit to all the assembled sages---
Parikshit ruled over Hastinapur. One day he went into a forest on a hunting 
spree. He saw a deer and managed to injure it with his arrow. But the injured 
deer disappeared from his sight. Parikshit chased the injured deer in the 
direction it had disappeared. He reached a place where Sage Shamik was 
engrossed in his meditation. Parikshit enquired Sage Shamik if he had seen 
that injured deer. But Sage Shamik being in deep meditation did not respond 
to Parikshit query. This made Parikshit extremely angry and he wrapped a 
dead snake around Shamik's neck as a punishment for not having answered 
his question. But, it made no difference to Sage Shamik and he continued with 
his meditation. Parikshit went back fuming in anger. 
Shringi was the son of Sage Shamik. When he saw a dead snake coiling around 
his father's neck, he cursed--'Whoever has tried to insult my father will not 
live to see the seventh day because a takshak nag would bite him to death.' 
When Sage Shamik learnt about his son's curse, he reproached his son and 
sent a disciple named Daurmukh to inform Parikshit so that he (Parikshit) 
could take some preventive measures. 
Daurmukh went and narrated the whole incident to king Parikshit. Parikshit 
became very scared and he started living on a canopy that had been 
constructed in the middle of river Ganges on his instructions. Now he felt 
secured and safe. Meanwhile a poor Brahmin named Kashyap came to know 
about the curse that poor Parikshit had received. He knew how to cure a 
person bitten by snake. So he thought that it was an excellent opportunity for 
him to receive monetary awards from the king. So, he proceeded towards the 
place where Parikshit was staying. 

1064 
 



On his way, Kashyap met a Brahmin who in reality was Takshak in disguise. 
Takshak was on his way to kill Parikshit. He asked Kashyap about the reason 
he was going to meet Parikshit. 
Kashyap revealed to Takshak that he could neutralize the influence of poison 
in any person bitten by a snake. Takshak wanted to examine the authenticity 
of Kashyap's statement, so he inserted his poisonous fangs into the trunk of a 
huge tree. A man was sitting on the branches of that tree. The tree as well as 
the man was charred to death within no time. 
Kashyap, really brought the tree and that man back to life. Takshak was 
stunned by this unbelievable act. He asked Kashyap how much he expected as 
reward from the king. Kashyap revealed the amount, which he expected from 
Parikshit in lieu of giving him a fresh lease of life. 
Takshak gave lot of wealth to him as a bribe and Kashyap went back home 
satisfied. Takshak then summoned all his companions and instructed them to 
go to the place where Parikshit lived, disguising themselves as hermits. All the 
serpents went to meet Parikshit impersonating as hermits and offered fruits 
to him. According to his plan, Takshak had hidden himself within a plum fruit. 
He bit Parikshit as soon as he got a chance. Parikshit died instantly. Janmejaya 
was crowned as the next king. Meanwhile, people started criticizing the 
treacherous conduct of Kashyap, which had resulted in the death of king 
Parikshit. He decided to make a pilgrimage to Venketachaleshwar so that he 
became liberated from his sin. 
KRISHNA TEERTH  
Sutji narrated a tale to all the assembled sages--During ancient times, a 
Brahmin named Ramkrishna did an austere penance at Venketachal mountain. 
He remained immobile during the entire course of his penance resulting into 
the development of mole hills all over his body. Indra was scarred by 
Ramkrishna's penance and caused a heavy downpour for a week. All the mole 
hills were washed away from Ramkrishna's body. Lord Srinivas became 
pleased and appeared before him. He blessed Ramkrishna by saying--'This 

1065 
 



holy place, where you have performed a great penance will be named after 
you as Krishna teerth. Anybody who makes a pilgrimage to this place will be 
liberated from all the sins.' Eulogizing Lord Venketashwar, Sutji says---'A man, 
who has the good fortune of seeing the divine appearance of Lord Srinivas 
even for a moment, attains salvation.'  
SOME OTHER PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE ON VENKETACHAL MOUNTAIN  
All the sages then requested Sutji to tell about some other places of 
pilgrimage situated on Venketachal mountain. 
Sutji replied---There are about one hundred and eight holy places situated on 
Venketachal mountain. Among all these holy places, six are considered to be 
capable of bestowing salvation-- -Swami pushkarini, Akash ganga, 
Papvinashan, Panduteerth, Kumar dharika teerth and Tumbu teerth. 
ANJANA'S PENANCE AT AKASHGANGA TEERTH  
Describing how Vayudeva had once assured Anjana that he would take birth 
as her son, Sutji told the sages---Anjana, being issue less even after a long 
married life, decided to do penance in order to beget a son. Sage Matang 
advised her to go to Akashganga teerth where her wishes would get fulfilled. 
Sage Matang also described the geographical location-- 'At a distance of ten 
yojans towards south is situated Dhanachal mountain, which is believed to be 
the abode of Lord Nrisimha. Brahma teerth lies in its vicinity. At a distance of 
ten yojans south of Brahma teerth, flows river 'Suvarnamukhari'. 
Venkentachal mountain is situated to the north of this river and the holiest 
place called Swamipushkarni is situated among its numerous peaks. You 
should visit that place and take a holy dip in its water. After that you should 
seek the blessings of Lord Varahaswami and Lord Venketeshwar. You should 
then go towards north of Swami teerth and you would reach Akashganga.' 
Acting as per Matang's instructions, Anjana went to Akashganga teerth and 
did her penance. 
Finally Lord Vayudeva appeared before her and promised to incarnate as 
Hanuman. 

1066 
 



VISHNU ADVISES BRAHMA TO GO TO PURUSHOTTAM KSHETRA  
The Sages asked---'O revered sage! We would like to know more about 
Purushottam Kshetra, where there is a majestic wooden idol of Lord Vishnu.' 
Sage Jaimini replied--The sacrosanct place of Purushottam Kshetra is graced 
by the presence of Lord Jagannath. During ancient times, Lord Varaha had 
rescued Prithvi from the clutches of Hiranyaksha--the mighty demon who had 
abducted her to Rasatala. After Prithvi had been established in its original 
position, Lord Brahma commenced his creations. Lord Brahma wondered 
about the means by which human beings could get liberated from three major 
types of sorrow---Adhyatmic (spiritual), Adhidaivik (deities wrath), 
Adhibhantik (related with this world). He sought the help of Lord Vishnu who 
eulogized the greatness of Purushottam Kshetra and advised him to go there. 
Lord Vishnu said-- 'Purushottam Kshetra is situated at the seashore, to the 
south of river Mahanadi. This sacroscant place of mine does not get affected 
by deluge. I dwell at this holiest place as 'Lord Purushottam'. There is a holy 
pond called Rohin in the vicinity. Anybody who takes a holy dip in that pond 
gets absolved of all his sins. O Brahma! You must pay a visit to Purushottam 
kshetra where spending a day bestows virtues greater than all the austerities 
combined together.' This way, Lord Brahma went to Purushottam kshetra as 
per the instructions of Lord Vishnu. 
MARKANDEYA EULOGIZES VISHNU  
Lord Brahma soon after reaching Purushottam kshetra sat down and started 
meditating. He was so engrossed in his meditation that he remained in that 
state for a very long time. This resulted into total chaos as Yamaraj found that 
his power of causing death had no effect on people living in Purushottam 
kshetra. Worried as he was, Yamaraj rushed towards Neelachal mountain and 
sought Lord Vishnu's intervention in the matter. 
Lord Vishnu smiled and signaled Goddess Lakshmi to say something. Goddess 
Lakshmi said--'O Suryanandan! Anybody residing at this holy place is freed 
from the vicious cycles of birth and death after becoming absolved of all his 
sins. This is the reason why you are experiencing this unusual problem. The 

1067 
 



whole world except this holy place will come into your jurisdiction.' Yamaraj 
was amazed by this revelation so he asked Lakshmi--'I would like to know why 
such a privilege is being given to this place?'Lakshmi replied--'O Ravinandan! 
At the time of deluge when the whole world was submerged in the water sage 
Markandeya was struggling to find a secure place for his survival. Although he 
was blessed with an unusually long life of seven kalpas but still he needed a 
place to live in. He started swimming and finally managed to reach 
Purushottam kshetra, which had remained unscathed by the turbulence of the 
deluge. There he saw a divine tree called 'Akshay Vat'. 
Markandeya continued to swim along the coast wondering how that place had 
managed to remain unaffected by deluge when the whole world had been 
submerged. Suddenly he heard a voice, which appeared to be coming from 
the direction of the Akshay Vat--'O Markandeya! Don't worry! Take my refuge 
and you shall be protected.' Markandeya was very surprised and looked all 
around. He kept on swimming and saw Lord Vishnu, who was engrossed in his 
yoga nidra in Ksheer Sagar. I (Lakshmi) was also present there. Markandeya 
eulogized Vishnu in the following way--'Salutations to the supreme lord- the 
source of all creations! O Jagannath! Protect me from getting drowned.' Lord 
Vishnu opened his eyes and found Markandeya gasping for breath. On 
realizing the gravity of the situation he said--'Raise your head and look at the 
top of this Kalpa Vat. You would find an infant sleeping on a leaf of the Kalpa 
Vat. The infant is none other than Kal himself. You should enter inside his 
(Kal's) body through his opened mouth and live peacefully as there is no other 
place for you to live in.' Markandeya entered into Kal's body as per the 
instructions given by Lord Vishnu and was amazed by the expanse of his belly, 
which appeared like a bottomless pit. He also saw all the fourteen Bhuvans 
existing within Kal's belly including all the creatures-deities, sages, siddhas, 
gandharvas, etc. Markandeya wandered all over the place and after getting 
tired came out through Kal's opened mouth. He found Lord Vishnu was still 
present there accompanied by his consort-Lakshmi. Markandeya made 
salutations to both of them and narrated his experiences he had inside Kal's 
belly. Lord Vishnu blessed him and made a revelation--' The place you had 

1068 
 



visited few moments ago is beyond the limits of creation or deluge. The name 
of this holiest place is Purushottam kshetra and it is my permanent abode for I 
do not leave it even for a moment.'Markandeya was very impressed and 
requested Lord Vishnu to allow him to live there. 
Lord Vishnu replied--' O BrahmaRishi! I shall remain at Purushottam-kshetra 
till the end of this kalpa. I shall also create a sacrosanct place, which would 
enable you to become immortal.' Sage Markandeya then dug up a reservoir 
with the help of Vishnu's chakra. He did an austere penance to please Lord 
Maheshwar as the result of which he was indeed blessed with immortality. 
In course of time, this reservoir became famous as 'Markandeya kund'. 
HOLY PLACES IN THE VICINITY OF PURUSHOTTAM - KSHETRA  
Dwelling in length upon the majesty of Purushottam kshetra, Goddess 
Lakshmi said-- Purushottam kshetra resembles a conch in shape and is graced 
by the presence of Lord Shiva. 
Towards its north is situated a temple of Lord Neelkanth. A famous Shivalinga 
named Kapal mochan is also situated in the vicinity. One who makes a 
pilgrimage to Kapalmochan becomes liberated from gravest of sins. A temple 
of Goddess Vimla Devi is also situated nearby. 
Purushottam kshetra is considered to be supreme among all the places of 
pilgrimage and for this very reason it is aptly named 'Teerth Raj'. A divine 
pond called Rohin kund is also situated nearby. Anybody who takes a holy dip 
there is freed from the vicious cycles of birth and death. It is believed that the 
increased level of water at the time of deluge ultimately recedes and 
disappears into this pond. 
Goddess Lakshmi said--' O Dhanraj! This holy place is beyond your jurisdiction 
because people living there never experience death. It is well protected by 
eight Goddesses from all the eight directions. The names of these eight 
Goddesses are Mangla, Lamba, Kalratri, Marichika, Vimla, Sarvamangla, 
Ardhashini and Chandrupa. How can Lord Rudra be absent when Rudrani has 
manifested herself in eight forms, so, he has manifested himself in eight 

1069 
 



different forms as wellKapalmochan, Kshetrapal, Yameshwar, 
Markandeyeshwar, Ishan, Bilveshwar, Neelkanth, and Vateshwar.While 
describing the majesty of Purushottam kshetra, Goddess Lakshmi revealed to 
Lord Brahma--' In the coming Satya yuga there would be a king named 
Indradyumna and would be famous for his unflinching devotion in Lord 
Vishnu. Being pleased by the king's devotion, Lord Vishnu would ultimately 
manifest himself from a wooden structure to bless him. 
Vishwakarma would then carve out four idols (Jagannath, Balbhadra, 
Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra) from the wooden block all of which would be 
installed by none other than you (Brahma).'  
Once, while Sage Jaimini was describing the greatness of Purushottam kshetra 
to the assembled sages, all of them curiously asked him--'Where is 
Purushottam kshetra situated?' Jaimini replied --'Utkal is situated at the 
eastern coast of Bharatavarsha. At the time of deluge, when everything gets 
submerged in water Utkal remains unaffected and it is the very place from 
where the knowledge of the Vedas spread in all directions. The residents of 
Utkal are not only learned but also very prosperous. There is not a single 
person in this land who is not a devotee of Lord Vishnu. All the people 
belonging to the four prominent castes (Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and 
Shudra) diligently follow their respective dharma. This holy place never 
experiences natural calamities of any kind.' Sage Jaimini then went on to 
narrate the tale of king Indradyumna to all the assembled sages --'In Satya 
yuga there lived a noble and virtuous king named Indradyumna, who ruled 
over the province of Malva. He was a great devotee of Lord Vishnu. One day, 
while worshipping in a temple, he asked the priest- I have a wish, which still 
remains unfulfilled. I have a deep desire of seeing Lord Jagannath with my 
mortal eyes. Is there any means with the help of which I can get my wish 
fulfilled?' The royal priest had no answer to the king's query so he kept quiet. 
Suddenly, he saw a group of pilgrims coming towards the temple. He thought 
that perhaps one of them might be having an answer to the king's query. 
When the pilgrims arrived at the temple, the royal priest posed the same 

1070 
 



question to them. One of the pilgrims answered--' There is a place called 
Odhra, where is situated a grand temple of Lord Jagannath. This sacrosanct 
place is also famously known as Purushottam kshetra and is situated at the 
foothills of the Neelachal mountain. There is a holy pond called Rohin situated 
nearby. At the eastern bank of this pond is situated a majestic temple of Lord 
Vasudev. The idol of Lord Vasudev is made of 'Indraneel' diamond. To the 
west of this temple lies 'Shabardeep' hermitage, from where starts a path 
leading to Jagannath temple.' Having said this, the pilgrim disappeared from 
everybody's sight. Not only Indradyumna but all the pilgrims were equally 
amazed by his sudden disappearance. Indradyumna was convinced that Lord 
Jagannath had himself come there in the guise of a pilgrim. Now, his desire of 
visiting Purushottam kshetra became even more intense. Indradyumna 
instructed his priest to find out the exact location of Purushottam kshetra by 
sending somebody over there. Later on, the priest went home and sought the 
help of Vidyapati-his younger brother in this regard. Vidyapati readily agreed 
to help his brother and one fine day he proceeded on his journey with a select 
group of his trusted friends. 
After a long and arduous journey all of them reached 'Ekamravan' forest, 
situated at the foothills of Neelachal mountain. The thought of being so near 
their destination made everybody extremely excited. But, despite their best of 
efforts they could not find Shabardeep ashram. Being tired, all of them 
decided to take rest for a while and then recommence their efforts to find out 
the location of Shabardeep hermitage. Finding a huge tree, all of them took 
rest under the shade of that tree. 
Suddenly, they heard a heavenly voice, which appeared to be coming from the 
western direction. 
They followed the voice and reached Shabardeep ashram in a short time. 
There they saw a large gathering of devotees. One of the devotees, whose 
name was Vishvavasu, curiously asked Vidyapati--'It is not easy to reach this 
place. From where are you coming and where do you intend to go? You must 
be tired--wait, till I return with some refreshment for all of you.' Vidyapati was 

1071 
 



not in a mood to waste his time, as he was aware that Indradyumna was 
eagerly waiting for him to return. He told Vishvavasu-- I have a difficult 
mission to accomplish so, I am not in a position to waste my time. I am the 
younger brother of the royal priest of king Indradyumna. The king has vowed 
not to have a single morsel of food till he makes a pilgrimage to Purushottam 
kshetra. He has sent me with a specific purpose of finding the exact location of 
Purushottam kshetra and the easiest route leading to it. So, help me reach the 
temple of Lord Jagannath as soon as possible.' VIDYAPATI EULOGIZES LORD 
NEELMADHAV Vishvavasu told Vidyapati--' I have heard this prophesy of 
Indradyumna's possible arrival at Purushottam kshetra in the near future. Not 
only that, I have also heard that Indradyumna would become so impressed 
with Purushottam kshetra that he would settle down there for good after 
renouncing everything.' Vishvavasu then requested Vidyapati to follow him 
and started negotiating the steep heights of Neelachal mountain. Vidyapati 
followed him through the curvy and arduous paths of the mountain. Having 
walked for sometime, Vishvavasu pointed towards a pond and said--'This 
pond is famously known as Rohin kund. The kalpa vat that you see towards 
the east of this pond is considered to be so sacrosanct that a sinner becomes 
liberated of all his sins once he comes under its shade. Lord Jagannath's 
temple is situated between Rohin kund and the kalpa vat. Go ahead and have 
a darshan of Lord Jagannath for whom you have undertaken such an arduous 
travel.' Vidyapati's joys knew no bounds as he had been waiting for this 
moment for a long time. First he purified himself by taking a holy dip in Rohin 
kund and then went inside the temple to worship Lord Jagannath. He 
worshipped Lord Jagannath by chanting the sacred pranav mantra. After the 
worship was over, Vishvavasu requested Vidyapatito visit his place which was 
nearby. Vidyapati agreed and accompanied Vishvavasu to his place. Vidyapati 
was given a royal treat by his host, which made him wonder as to how could 
Vishvavasu arrange all the luxurious things at such a remote place. He could 
not control himself and asked Vishvavasu-- Even a king would have found it 
difficult to treat his guest as lavishly like you! I am amazed how you could 
make arrangements for all these things at a remote and secluded place like 

1072 
 



this! How do you manage this? Vishvavasu replied-- It is not as difficult as you 
believe. Since Purushottam kshetra is a sacrosanct place and it is frequently 
visited by the deities who make divine offerings to Lord Jagannath. I collect 
the residuals of whatever is offered to Jagannath from the temple and bring it 
home. So, I really don't have to make any special efforts to accumulate divine 
food stuffs. On account of eating these divine food stuffs, not only we have 
been blessed by eternal youth but also we are never troubled by old age. 
Vidyapati was very impressed and requested Vishvavasu to become his friend. 
He also reminded Vishvavasu that he wanted to return as soon as possible so 
that the king could go on a pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra. But, 
Vishvavasu made a shocking disclosure to Vidyapati and said-- King 
Indradyumna will never be able to have a divine glimpse of Lord Jagannath as 
the Lord is soon going to disappear. But, don't disclose this fact to the king 
otherwise he would get disheartened and abandon his plan of making a 
pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra. Finally, when the king in his utter 
frustration would try to end his life after not being able to have a divine 
glimpse of Neelmadhav, the most gracious Lord will appear in his dream and 
instruct him to get constructed four wooden idols of Jagannath, Balbhadra, 
Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra. 
Having accomplished his mission, Vidyapati proceeded on his return journey 
and once again he visited Purushottam kshetra, which fell on the way. He 
picked up a garland, which had been offered to Neelmadhav by some deity. 
Finally, when he reached Malwa he found king Indradyumna eagerly waiting 
for him. After presenting the garland to the king, he narrated his experiences 
he had at Purushottam kshetra--' O king! Lord Jagannath's idol is made of 
Neelmani diamond and is very ancient. Even the deities have deep regards 
and undiluted reverence for Lord Jagannath and are frequent visitors to 
Purushottam Kshetra. The garland, which I have given you, was in fact had 
been offered to Lord Jagannath by the deities- these flowers do not wither 
and have fragrance lasting for eternity. Purushottam kshetra remains 
untouched by old age, sorrow or disease and gives salvation to anybody, who 
goes on a pilgrimage over there.'  

1073 
 



INDRADYUMNA LEAVES FOR PURUSHOTTAM KSHETRA 
Indradyumna had been waiting for this moment for a long time- the moment 
when he would get a chance to go on a pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra. 
Revealing his great plan to Vidyapati, he said--' Now, the time has finally come 
for me to go on a pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra. I also intend to develop 
that holy place as a prominent place of pilgrimage. I would shift my subject to 
that holy place and perform one hundred Ashwamedha yagyas once I reach 
there. I also intend to devote rest of my life in the worship of Lord Jagannath.' 
While the conversation was going on, the ever wandering Sage Narada, 
arrived there and informed Indradyumna how pleased were the deities after 
learning of his holy intention of developing Purushottam kshetra into a major 
place of pilgrimage. Narada also dwelt on length on the virtues of Jagannath's 
worship. Indradyumna, thinking that Narada might prove to be of great help 
during the course of pilgrimage because of his vast travelling experience, 
requested him to accompany him to Purushottam kshetra. Narada readily 
agreed to accompany the king and said--' O king! I shall reveal to you the 
importance of all the holy places that we come across in the course of our 
pilgrimage.' Finally, king Indradyumna left for Purushottam kshetra followed 
by a large procession, that consisted of his subject, all the ministers and army 
officers. The entourage touched the bank of river Mahanadi by evening. 
Deciding to take rest and spend the night there, king Indradyumna first took 
his bath and then worshipped Lord Jagannath. After the king had taken his 
bath, all the rest of the people also took their bath and then everybody sat 
down to have their dinner. After the meal was over, while Indradyumna was 
busy discussing with his ministers on the future course of action, somebody 
came with the news that the king of Utkal had arrived. Indradyumna ordered 
the messenger to bring the esteemed guest with all the honour and respect. 
The king of Utkal arrived and broke a disturbing news-- 'Indradyumna, I am 
afraid your intention of having a divine glimpse of Lord Jagannath is not going 
to fructify as Lord Neelmadhav has presently concealed himself beneath a 
huge heap of sand caused by a ferocious sandstorm. The fallout of this 

1074 
 



inauspicious incident has been extremely adverse on my kingdom-- as my 
people are experiencing acute famine. 
Indradyumna was shocked, especially the thought of not getting a chance to 
have a divine glimpse of Lord Neelmadhav made him dejected- he saw all his 
efforts going in vain. But, Narada consoled him by saying --'Don't worry! Lord 
Neelmadhav is extremely merciful and he will certainly give you an 
opportunity to have his divine glimpse.'  
INDRADYUMNA REACHES 'EKAMRACHHETRA'  
Continuing with the tale of Indradyumna, sage Jaimini told all the sages--'Next 
morning, Indradyumna and his entourage crossed Mahanadi on boats and 
reached Ekamrachhetra where they worshipped Lord Purushottam. After that 
they worshipped on their onwards journey and reached Kotishwar Mahalaya 
where they worshipped Lord Tribhuneshwar with appropriate rituals. Lord 
Tribhuneshwar appeared after becoming pleased and blessed Indradyumna 
that his wish of seeing Lord Jagannath was soon going to be fulfilled. Lord 
Tribhuneshwar then instructed Narada--' O great soul! After reaching 
Purushottam kshetra, help Indradyumna perform one hundred yagyas as per 
the instructions given by Lord Brahma. I along with Goddess Durga, dwell at 
the entrance of conch shaped Purushottam kshetra. Although, presently Lord 
Jagannath has concealed himself beneath a heap of sand yet very soon he is 
going to manifest himself. 
Indradyumna should get constructed a magnificent temple of Lord Jagannath 
at the same place, where once existed his idol and presently which is hidden 
beneath the heap of sand. Later on, Vishwakarma would then carve out four 
idols from a single piece of wood, which would subsequently be installed by 
Lord Brahma himself. Finally, Indradyumna's wish of seeing Lord Jagannath 
would get fulfilled. 
Narada assured Lord Tribhuneshwar that all his instructions would be 
followed in letter and spirit. The procession then left for the place indicated by 
Lord Tribhuneshwar. 

1075 
 



INDRADYUMNA EULOGIZES LORD NEELMADHAV  
After reaching the temple of Neelkanth-Mahadev, all of them worshipped 
Mahadev and Durga. 
They then visited the temple of Lord Nrisimha, situated under a sandalwood 
tree at the foothills of Neelachal mountain.King Indradyumna was anxiously 
waiting for the moment he would have a divine glimpse of Lord Jagannath. He 
requested Narada to take him to the place where Jagannath had hidden 
himself beneath the heap of sand. Narada took him near a Banyan tree and 
said--' Look at this huge Banyan tree that is two yojans in height and whose 
trunk is spread in the area of one yojan. To the north of this Banyan tree and 
to the north of Nrisimha temple lies the place where Lord Neelmadhav used 
to have his dwelling sometime ago but who has presently concealed himself. 
Now, the time is not very far when you would see Lord Jagannath with your 
mortal eyes.' Indradyumna bowed in reverence to the place where Lord 
Jagannath was supposed to remanifest himself in the near future. He 
eulogized the Lord as if he were already present there and this was true as 
Jagannath's idol was indeed present there albeit hidden beneath heaps of 
sand. He prayed- -'O lord! You are the one in whom every living creature 
ultimately takes refuge. My only wish is to be able to see your idol, which is 
presently hidden beneath heaps of sand.' Hardly had Indradyumna finished his 
prayer when he heard a heavenly voice--'O king! Do not worry! The day is not 
far when you would see me with your mortal eyes. You just need to follow 
Narada's instructions and your wish will be fulfilled. 
NARADA INSTALLS THE IDOL OF NRISIMHA  
Narada told Indradyumna--'Now, we should install an idol of Lord Nrisimha 
near Neelkanth's temple for this is the very place where you will be 
performing one thousand Ashwamedh Yagyas in the days to come. So, your 
first priority should be to get constructed a magnificent temple of Lord 
Nrisimha. I plan to stay here for five more days as Vishwakarma will be 
needing my help in carving out the idol of Lord Nrisihma.' Leaving Narada 
alone near the Neelkanth temple, Indradyumna went near the sandalwood 

1076 
 



tree, which was at a little distance from the temple, and was surprised to find 
Sughat- Vishwakarma's son waiting for him. He requested Sughat to construct 
a grand temple with its main entrance facing west. Sughat constructed the 
temple within four days. On the fifth day, Narada arrived there with an idol of 
Lord Nrisimha, which had been carved out by Vishwakarma. An auspicious day 
was chosen for installing the idol. After the idol had been installed, every body 
including king Indradyumna, Narada as well as the people accompanying the 
procession worshipped Lord Narsimha. 
INDRADYUMNA PERFORMS ASHWAMEDHA YAGYAS  
Sages, who had been listening to the tale narrated by Jaimini with rapt 
attention till then asked-- 'What did Indradyumna next do after the idol of 
Lord Nrisimha had been installed?' Sage Jaimini replied--'After the idol of Lord 
Nrisimha had been installed, Indradyumna began making preparations for 
Ashwamedha yagya. He sent invitations to all the deities, learned Brahmins 
and sages. When everybody arrived, he made a special request to Indra to 
remain present at the oblation site till the completion of one thousand 
Ashwamedha yagyas. Indra assured Indradyumna of his full cooperation and 
advised him to go ahead with his plan of accomplishing one thousand 
Ashwamedha yagyas. Finally, Indradyumna performed the first yagya under 
the supervision of learned priests. This way, he was able to successfully 
accomplish nine hundred and ninety nine yagyas without any problem. Finally, 
when the last Ashwamedha yagya was being performed, Indradyumna had a 
divine glimpse of Lord Vishnu while he was engrossed in his meditation. 
Indradyumna narrated his experience to Narada to which he got a reply that it 
was a good omen, which proved that the king was going to see Lord Jagannath 
with his mortal eyes.'  
JAGANNATH IDOL IS CARVED OUT  
After the rituals of final yagya ended, Narada advised Indradyumna to perform 
the rituals of 'Purnahuti' to mark the end of Yagya ceremony. Narada then 
went on to say--' A tree is considered to be the partial incarnation (Ansha 
avatar) of Lord Vishnu for each of his hair that falls on the earth gets 

1077 
 



transformed into a tree.' Narada, then pointing towards a tree told 
Indradyumna-- 'The almighty Lord has manifested himself in the form of this 
tree. Now, you should make preparations to get this tree installed on the 
great altar inside the temple.' The tree to which Narada had pointed was 
unique in the sense that it had only four branches on it. Indradyumna, 
following the instructions ordered his men to uproot the said tree and then 
install it on the 'Mahavedi' inside the temple. But, at the same time he was 
wondering as to who would carve out the four idols of Jagannath, Balbhadra, 
Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra. 
Suddenly, a heavenly voice was heard--' Lord Vishnu would manifest himself 
on the sacred altar on his own. An old carpenter, who is standing among you, 
should be sent inside the temple premise. The main door of the temple should 
then be shut and nobody should try to enter the temple till the idols are 
ready. One more thing to be kept in mind is that all of you should keep on 
beating drums so that nobody hears the sound emanating from the carving of 
the idols. 
Anybody, who hears this sound, is doomed to become deaf. Similarly, 
anybody who tries to see the act of idols being made shall loose his power of 
sight.' Indradyumna made elaborate arrangements as per the instructions 
given by the heavenly voice. 
The old carpenter was sent inside and the main door of the temple shut. On 
the fifteenth day, Lord Jagannath manifested himself along with Balbhadra, 
Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra.  
Once again heavenly voice was heard which said--'O king! Get all the four idols 
coloured on the basis of the complexion of the respective deities. The colour 
of Jagannath's idol should be dark blue similar to that of dark clouds. Similarly, 
the idol of Balbhadra should be coloured in white just like his fair complexion. 
The colour of Goddess Subhadra's idol should be reddish just like the rising 
Sun. Sudarshan chakra should be painted deep red. Either the descendants of 
Vishvavasu or your royal priest are entitled to participate in the consecration 
ceremony of the idols in future events.' Indradyumna, once again following 

1078 
 



the instructions, got the idols coloured in the way specified by the heavenly 
voice. After that, all the four idols were adorned with beautiful apparels and 
ornaments. Now, they really looked divine in their new looks. Looking at the 
divine idols of Jagannath, Indradyumna went into trance. Seeing his condition, 
Narada advised not to waste time and seek any boon from Lord Jagannath 
because the sole purpose for which Jagannath had manifested himself was to 
bless him and to fulfill his wish. Indradyumna immediately realized what 
Narada meant to say. He eulogized Lord Jagannath in the following way--'O 
Jagannath! Help me out from the sorrows of this world. I don't aspire for 
anything else.' Subsequently, Narada and the whole entourage, which had 
come along with king Indradyumna worshipped Lord Jagannath, Balbhadra, 
Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra. Lord Jagannath was worshipped amidst the 
chanting of Dwadashakshar mantra while Jagannath was worshipped with 
Purusha sukta. Similarly, Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra were worshipped 
amidst the chanting of Devisutra and vedic verses respectively. Finally, 
donations were made to the Brahmins and everybody was sent off with 
respect. 
CONSECRATION OF THE IDOLS  
King Indradyumna was anxious to get performed the rituals of consecration as 
soon as possible, so he asked Narada--'I am not aware of the proper rituals 
that are employed in the consecration of an idol. I need your help in this 
regard.' Narada then made a list of articles required for the consecration of 
idols and instructed Indradyumna to make arrangements for all those items. 
He also instructed the king to get constructed a grand palace for Lord Brahma, 
who was supposed to arrive shortly to perform the consecration ceremony. 
Narada said--'Get constructed three chariots for all the three deities. The 
chariot meant for Lord Jagannath should have a mast on its top with the figure 
of Garuda on it. Similarly, Balbhadra's chariot should have a mast with a 
plough drawn on it whereas Subhadra's chariot should have a mast with a 
beautiful lotus drawn on it. 

1079 
 



The number of horses pulling the chariots of Jagannath, Balbhadra and 
Subhadra should be Sixteen, fourteen and twelve respectively.' It did not take 
much time to construct the three chariots as per the instructions given by 
Narada. 
Very soon Lord Brahma arrived there, accompanied by all the deities, to 
perform the consecration of the four idols. On seeing Lord Brahma, 
Indradyumna's joys knew no bounds and he paid his obeisance to the creator. 
Lord Brahma said--' See how fortunate you are. All the deities and sages have 
come here to help you in your cause.' Lord Brahma then performed the rituals 
of consecration on the auspicious day of ashtami of the bright half of the 
Hindu month Vaishakh. The day was Thursday and the Nakshatra was Pushya. 
RATH YATRA  
Dwelling on length about the auspicious days on which Rath Yatra should be 
taken out, sage Jaimini told the assembled sages--'The combination of 'Teej' 
falling in the month of Vaishakh (bright half) and Rohini nakshatra, is 
considered to be extremely auspicious. A king should get constructed three 
chariots on the above mentioned day. The entire path along which the 
chariots as well as the procession is supposed to pass should be decorated 
with beautiful flowers and banners. On the second day of the bright half of 
the Hindu month-Ashadh, all the three deities are worshipped and 
subsequently installed on their respective chariots, which are then pulled by 
the devotees. The procession then passes through the major routes of the city 
so that people can pay their obeisance. After reaching Gundicha Nagar, the 
procession should stay there for seven days on the bank of Bindu teerth. On 
the eighth day, all the chariots should begin their return journey. This famous 
Rath yatra lasts for nine days. 
SOME PROMINENT PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE  
Once, Sage Shaunak asked Sutji about the means, which enabled human 
beings to attain salvation in Kali yuga. Sutji recounted a tale -- ' 
Once, Kartikeya had posed the same question to Lord Shiva. 

1080 
 



Emphasizing on the importance of pilgrimages, Lord Shiva had told him that in 
Kali yuga anybody could attain salvation by going on pilgrimage to holy places. 
Giving names of some prominent holy places and rivers, Lord Shiva had told 
Kartikeya that some of them were capable of fulfilling any wish of a man, 
while some gave salvation. The names of some prominent rivers Lord Shiva 
had given were Ganga, Godavari, Narmada, Tapti, Yamuna, Kshipra, Gautami, 
Kaushiki, Kaveri, Tamraparni, Chandrabhaga, Sindhu, Gandaki, Sarswati, etc. 
According to Shiva all these rivers were not only capable of fulfilling any wish 
of a man but also giving salvation. Naming some prominent holy places, Lord 
Shiva had told Kartikeya that Ayodhya, Dwarka, Kashi, Mathura, Avanti, 
Kurukshetra, Ramteerth, Kanchi, Purushottam kshetra, Pushkar kshetra, 
Varaha kshetra and Badrikashram were capable of liberating a man from the 
sorrows of this world.' Lord Shiva had told Kartikeya-- 'Anybody who goes on a 
pilgrimage to Ayodhya becomes absolved of all his sins. Lord Hari dwells at 
Dwarka and does not abandon it even for a moment. 
A devotee, who takes a holy dip in river Gomti and then pays obeisance to 
Lord Krishna, attains salvation even if he is ignorant. In the same manner, one 
who takes a bath in the holy Panchganga at Varanasi, becomes free from the 
cycles of birth and death. Anybody, who goes on a pilgrimage to Kashi and 
pays obeisance to Lord Vishwanath, is freed from all the bondage of this 
world. Great importance has been attached to the performance of 'tarpan' at 
Vishramteerth and anybody who performs the rituals of tarpan with sesame 
seeds and water, his ancestors are freed from the tortures of the hell. Taking a 
holy dip in Kotiteerth at Avantipuri, in the Hindu month of Vaishakh and 
worshipping Lord Mahakaleshwar too absolves a man of all his sins. Donating 
gold either at Kurukshetra or Ramteerth, on a solar eclipse day, helps a man in 
attaining salvation. Going on a pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra and 
worshipping Lord Jagannath after taking a holy dip in Markandeya sarovar, 
bestows incomparable virtues. 
Badrinath, the dwelling place of Lord Vishnu, is considered to be the supreme 
place of pilgrimage and even its remembrance is capable of giving salvation. 

1081 
 



Virtues attained by the performance of various deeds (tapa, yoga, samadhi), 
appear to be insignificant as compared to virtues attained by going on a 
pilgrimage to Badrikashram. 
THE MAJESTY OF BADRIKSHETRA  
Kartikeya asked Lord Shiva--'How did this sacrosanct place originate? Who is 
the presiding deity of this place?' Lord Shiva replied--'Badrikashram is an 
eternal city and Lord Narayan is its presiding deity. A mere sight of 
Badrikashram is enough to free a man from all the bondage of life. There are 
numerous other holy places situated in the vicinity, Kedarnath being one of 
them.' To emphasize the significance of Badrikashram, Lord Shiva narrated the 
following tale to Kartikeya--'In Satya yuga, Lord Vishnu existed in his physical 
form at Badrikashram for the benediction of human beings. But, in Treta yuga, 
only sages had the privilege of perceiving him with the help of yoga. At the 
advent of Dwapar things changed drastically and Lord Vishnu just disappeared 
from Badrikashram. Deities became worried and asked Lord Brahma about the 
reason that made Lord Vishnu disappear. Even Lord Brahma had no answer to 
this question. 
Thinking that Lord Vishnu must have gone to Ksheer sagar-his eternal abode, 
all the deities led by Brahma went there. They eulogized Vishnu, who emerged 
from the Ksheer Sagar. But, none of the deities except Lord Brahma could see 
him. Lord Vishnu told Brahma that the main reason why he disappeared from 
Badrikashram was the flawed intelligence and arrogance of the deities. 
Brahma informed the deities whatever Vishnu had told him. All the deities 
were ashamed of themselves and returned to heaven with long faces. Feeling 
pity on the deities, I (Shiva) disguised myself as a sanyasi and carried Lord 
Vishnu's idol from Naradateerth to Badrikashram and installed it over there to 
uplift the sagging morale of the deities. This is how Lord Vishnu once again 
graced Badrikashram with his presence. Even a grain of 'prasad' had at 
Badrikashram is enough to liberate a man from all his sins.'  
THE IMPORTANCE OF HINDU MONTH 'KARTIK'  

1082 
 



Once, on being asked by some sages about the significance of the Hindu 
month- Kartik, Sutji narrated the following tale-- ' 
Once, Narada had asked Lord Brahma the same question. At that time Lord 
Brahma had revealed to Narada that 'Kartik' was supreme among all the 
months just as Lord Vishnu is supreme among all the deities and Badrikashram 
is the crown of all the places of pilgrimage. According to Brahma all these 
three would have greater significance in Kali yuga as compared to any other 
yuga. Kartik is very dear to Lord Vishnu and any virtuous deed done during this 
month never goes without being rewarded. One important characteristic of 
this month is that all the deities live in the proximity of human beings for the 
entire period of the month and accept everything that is offered to them. 
Penance done in this month or donations made during this month is believed 
to give Imperishable virtues. There is a special significance of donating food 
grains during this month. Similarly, worshipping Shaligram during this month 
also has great significance. Observing austerities during this month or 
worshipping Lord Vishnu with appropriate rituals liberates one's ancestors 
from the tortures of the hell. Worshipping Lord Vishnu with petals of lotus 
helps him to become absolved of all the sins committed in his previous many 
births. Worshipping Lord Vishnu with tulsi leaves helps one in getting cured of 
incurable diseases. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF 'HOLY DIPS' IN MARGASHIRSH  
Continuing with the description of the significance of various months, Sutji 
said-- ' 
Once, while Lord Vishnu was engrossed in his 'yoganidra' at Shwetdweepa, 
Lord Brahma arrived there and requested him to describe the importance of 
Margashirsh. Lord Vishnu had told him that a devotee aspiring for unification 
with him, must observes austerities during this month. 
Describing the proper method of observing austerities Lord Vishnu had said 
that one should get up early in the morning and after performing the 
ritualistic 'achaman', he should remember me by chanting my one thousand 

1083 
 



names. Next, he should take his bath according to the rituals mentioned in the 
scriptures, as follows-- He should remove some soil from near the roots of 
tulsi plant and pluck few tulsi leaves. Holding both the things in his hand, he 
should chant either Gayatri mantra or the mantra, 'Om Namo Narayanay', so 
that they become sanctified. While taking his bath, it is a must to eulogize 
Ganga in the following way- 'O Ganga! Though have manifested from Vishnu's 
feet and hence called Vaishnavi. Myself being a devotee of Lord Vishnu, you 
should protect me from all the possible sins I am likely to commit in my whole 
life.' A devotee should say this prayer for seven times and take the same 
number of holy dips in the river. He should then put on tidy clothes and 
perform 'tarpan' in the names of all the deities sages as well as ancestors. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CHARITY MADE IN 'VAISHAKH'  
Continuing with his tales, Sutji said--'  
Once, king Ambarish asked Narada about the reason why Lord Vishnu had 
special liking for the Hindu month-Vaishakh. Narada's answer was that 
Vaishakh had been given special privilege by Lord Brahma himself and is 
believed to fulfill all the wishes of a man. No other month is as dear to Lord 
Vishnu as Vaishakh. The sin raises its ugly head only till a devotee has bathed 
before sunrise in the month of Vaishakh but once he has taken his bath all his 
sins just disappears. This is also the period when all the deities are believed to 
dwell in all the rivers, ponds, lakes, apart from the holy rivers. Great 
significance has been attached to doing charitable deeds in this month, 
especially providing water to thirsty. Similarly, donating certain articles like 
umbrella, fans, shoes, all have their own importance. One who gets 
constructed an inn for the comfort of the travelers and provides water to 
them attains imperishable virtues. No charitable deed can ever match the 
virtue of donating food grains and one who accomplishes this great act can be 
aptly called a 'Pita' (Father). 
AYODHYAPURI 

1084 
 



Once, on being asked by sage Bhardwaj and few others about the grandeur of 
Ayodhya, Sutji replied--'Ayodhya, a sacrosanct city is based on the bank of 
river Saryu. It is the very city where the famous king Ikshavaku ruled once 
upon a time. The term Ayodhya means unconquerable and consists of three 
root letters: a- symbolizing Brahma, y-symbolizing Vishnu and dh-symbolizing 
Rudra. It is a place where Lord Vishnu has his abode for eternity and does not 
leave it even for a moment. According to the scriptures Ayodhya is based on 
Sudarshan chakra. It is well expanded in the radius of one yojan. Its eastern 
boundary stretches up to one yojan from a place called 'Sahastradhan'. 
Similarly, the western front stretches up to one yojan from a place called 
'Sama', the southern up to one yojan from the bank of Saryu and its northern 
boundary up to one yojan starting from the bank of river Tamsa. In ancient 
times, a Brahmin named Vishnu Sharma had performed an austere penance at 
Ayodhya. Lord Vishnu had appeared after becoming pleased by him and had 
created a holy place by digging up the earth with his Sudarshan chakra. 
Anybody, who takes a holy dip in Chakrateerth becomes absolved of all his 
sins. 
III. BRAHMA KHAND  
RAMESHWAR KSHETRA  
Once, Shaunak and few other sages asked Sutji as to how could a man become 
free from the bondage of the world. They also inquired whether there was an 
existence of any such holy place capable of liberating a man from heinous of 
sin. 
Sutji replied--'Ramteerth is supreme among all the places of pilgrimage. A 
mere sight of this holy place is enough to free a man from the bondage of this 
mortal world. Going on a pilgrimage to Rameshwar gives virtues similar to 
what is attained by performing all the yagyas. One, who takes a holy dip at 
Setu Rameshwar, attains to Vishnu loka. Merely by sleeping at the sea shore 
of Rameshwar a man gets absolved of heinous of sins like brahmhatya, etc. A 
man is blessed if his remains are consigned to the holy waters at Rameshwar 
after his death. Scriptures say that five types of sins are as grave as the sin of 

1085 
 



Brahmahatya-- 1. One, who criticizes sages 2. A selfish person who cooks food 
only for himself, 3. One who destroys well laid path making it difficult for 
people to tread upon, 4. One who accepts food from a 'chandal' and 5. One 
who sells food grains to a chandal. But, all these just disappears once the 
sinner reaches Rameshwar. 
SETU BANDH  
All the sages were curious to know about the holy places in the vicinity of 
Rameshwar. Sutji replied--Sri Ram replied went into exile accompanied by 
Sita, his consort and his younger brother, Lakshman. Ravan, the demon king 
who ruled over Lanka deceitfully abducted Sita. 
Subsequently, Sri Ram befriended Sugreev and killed Bali, who harboured 
enemity against him. 
Sugriva sent monkeys in all directions to find out where Sita had been kept by 
Ravan. Later on Sri Ram reached Mahendra Parvat accompanied by Lakshman, 
Hanuman, Sugriva, Jambavan, Nal and may more brave warriors. They stayed 
for a brief period at Chakrateerth, where Vibhishan came to see Sri Ram. 
Eventually Vibhishan was nominated the king of all the demons by Sri Ram to 
the great displeasure of his brother Ravan. 
Sri Ram and his army faced an uphill task of reaching Lanka for they had to 
cross the ocean, which lay as a great barrier between them and their 
destination. Samudra (ocean) revealed to Sri Ram that Nala had divine powers 
and whatever he would throw in the Ocean would not sink down but keep on 
floating. Nala tried to check the authenticity of Samudra's statement by 
throwing a huge rock into the ocean, as he himself was not aware of his 
powers. To the sheer amazement of everybody present there the rock started 
floating on the surface of the ocean instead of sinking down. All the rest of the 
monkeys tried to emulate Nala's feat by throwing huge rocks into the ocean 
and to their own surprise found that the rocks did not sink. This was how a 
bridge was built and across the ocean which made it possible for Sri Ram and 
his army to cross the ocean. Then length of Setu Rameshwar Bandh is hundred 

1086 
 



yojan and it is ten yojan broad. There are many holy places situated on the 
bridge prominent among which are Chakrateerth, Pap-vinashan teerth, Sita-
sarovar, Mangal-teerth, Amrit-watika, Brahma-kund, Hanumatkund, Agastya-
teerth, Ram-teerth, Lakshman-teerth, Jaya-teerth, Lakshmi-teerth, Agni-
teerth, Shiv-teerth, Shankh-teerth, Yamuna-teerth, Ganga-teerth, Koti-teerth, 
Manas-teerth and Dhanushkoti teerth. 
RAMESHWAR LINGA  
Describing how Sri Ram had installed Rameshwar Linga, Sutji said--' After 
killing Ravan, Sri Ram enthroned Vibhishan as the king of Lanka. While 
returning to Ayodhya he made a brief stop at Gandhamadan mountain. Since 
the thought of having killed a Brahmin (Ravan) kept on tormenting him, he 
decided to atone for his sins. So, he installed the idol of Rameshwar linga at 
Rameshwar setu. Rameshwar Linga is so sacrosanct that all the holy places, 
sages and ancestors are believed to exist within the temple premise of 
Maheshwar Linga. Being installed by Sri Ram himself, this particular linga has 
special significance attached to it. One who goes on a pilgrimage to this holy 
place is certain to attain salvation even if he were a 'Mlechha' (born in a low 
caste). 
DHARMARANYA KSHETRA  
Once, Sage Vyasa went to meet Yudhisthira, who requested him to describe 
the significance of Dharmaranya kshetra. 
Sage Vyasa replied-- 'O king!  
Once, Dharmaraj-Yudhisthira did an austere penance to please Lord Shiva. As 
usual, Indra became scarred because he thought that Dharmaraj was doing 
penance with the intention of acquiring Indraloka. He and other deities went 
to seek the help of Lord Brahma, who did not have any clue. So, all of them 
went to Kailash mountain to seek Lord Shiva's help. Since Shiva was aware of 
Dharma's motive, he explained to the deities that there was nothing to worry 
about. But, Indra was not satisfied and the thought of loosing his kingdom 
continued to torment him. 

1087 
 



Indra then instructed a beautiful Apsara named Vardhini to go to the place 
where Dharma was doing penance and disturb him by corrupting his thoughts. 
Vardhini went to the place where Dharma was engrossed in his penance and 
was successful in disturbing him. When Dharma opened his eyes he found a 
beautiful Apsara in front of him. Vardhini asked Dharma--'O Lord! What is the 
objective with which you are doing such an austere penance? Being an 
embodiment of virtuosity yourself, you prevail in the whole world. So, in a 
sense you already the Lord of the world - what else do you need?' Dharma 
told Vardhini that he was doing penance with the objective of having a divine 
glimpse of Lord Shiva. Vardhini informed him that Indra was scarred of losing 
his kingdom and hence had sent her to disturb his penance. Dharma was 
pleased by her truthfulness and wanted to reward her for that. Vardhini 
expressed her desire of having her abode in Indraloka for eternity and also of 
having a place of pilgrimage named on her. Dharma blessed her after which 
she returned to Indraloka. 
Dharma once again engrossed himself in penance. Ultimately, Lord Shiva 
became pleased and appeared before him. 'Ask for any boon and it shall be 
bestowed to you', said Lord Shiva. 
Dharmaraj replied -'O lord! I want this place to be named after me. I also 
request you to grace this place by your presence.' Lord Shiva blessed him and 
fulfilled both his wishes. This was how Dharmakshetra got its name. 
Subsequently, Lord Shiva appeared in the form of Dharmeshwar linga in 
accordance with the second wish of Dharmaraj. After his penance was over, 
Dharma also had created a holy reservoir over there which is believed to 
absolve a man of all his sins. 
LOSS OF MORAL VALUES IN KALIYUGA  
On being asked by Yudhisthira about the life-style of people in Kali yuga, sage 
Vyasa replied-- 'There will be a widespread prevalence of sinful deeds and lack 
of moral values in Kali yuga. 

1088 
 



People would become untruthful and would become critical of revered sages. 
Moral values would decline to such an extent their minds would be 
preoccupied by nothing else but the thought of sex. In Kali yuga women will 
feel most insecure and even her near and dear ones would become 
untrustworthy - men belonging to their own gotras would try to exploit her. 
Brahmins would be criticized because of their inappropriate conduct. They 
would become arrogant, would start trading their knowledge and would not 
follow the teachings of the Vedas. 
Similarly, Kshatriyas would become cowards and a mere reference of battle 
would be enough to scare them. Majority of people would indulge in immoral 
deeds like gambling and consume variety of intoxication. They would always 
look out for an opportunity to grab other's wealth by deceitful means. 
Married women would not fulfill their obligation towards their husbands. 
Cows would give lesser milk and trees would bear fewer fruits. Young girls 
would become pregnant at the raw age of eleven years. Brahmins, by their 
conduct would undermine the importance of holy places and would indulge in 
excessive eating and drinking. In Kali yuga, people would not give any 
importance to caste system. Kings would loose their kingdoms and Mlechhas 
would become the rulers. Treachery, enemity and disrespect towards elders 
would become the norms of the day. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CHATURMASYA VRAT  
Once, on being asked by Narada about the importance of Chaturmasya, Lord 
Brahma said-- 'Chaturmasya is the period of four months during which Lord 
Vishnu is believed to take rest in Ksheer-Sagar. So quite naturally, all the 
oceans, rivers and ponds are believed to attain divinity due to the presence of 
Lord Vishnu in Ksheer-Sagar during this period. This is the reason why great 
importance has been attached to taking holy bath during this period. A 
devotee, who observes austerities related with Lord Vishnu during these four 
months, becomes absolved of all his sins. All the deities are believed to dwell 
within Lord Vishnu during this period. Going on pilgrimage to holy places and 
taking holy dips in rivers bestow indescribable virtues. 

1089 
 



A devotee must not forget to perform the rituals of 'Tarpan' after taking his 
daily bath. He should also observe abstinence and avoid indulging in sensual 
pleasures during this period of four months. There is special significance of 
making donations during this period, especially donating food-grains. 
IMPORTANCE OF ABSTINENCE DURING CHATURMAS  
Continuing with the importance of austerities observed during Chaturmas, 
Lord Brahma said-- 'Human-beings are bundle of desires and long for worldly 
things. So, there is a great importance of abstinence and forsaking things, 
which one is very fond of. One who relinquishes his most favourite thing 
during this period gets the same thing in abundance in the next world. A 
householder, who renounces his family life for the sake of his devotion during 
this period, becomes free from the tortures of recurring births and deaths. 
Similarly, relinquishing the use of chilly in one's food during this period helps 
him to acquire great fortune. Renouncing silk cloths during this period gives 
imperishable joy. One should avoid wearing black cloths during this period. 
Combing and shaving are prohibited during this period. 
A devotee should worship Lord Vishnu on the auspicious day of Kark 
Sankranti. Normally black plums are offered to Lord Vishnu while worshipping. 
Celibacy is believed to be the best austerity and anybody who observes it 
during the period of chaturmas, never experiences sorrow in his life. 
RITUALS PERTAINING TO SHODASH UPACHAR  
Once, on being asked by Narada about the proper methods of performing 
Shodash upachar rituals, Lord Brahma said --'In normal circumstances, when 
Lord Vishnu is worshipped by employing the rituals of Shodashopachar it is 
considered as 'Tapa'. But, when the same rituals of shodashopachar are 
employed to worship Lord Vishnu during chaturmas, it is considered as 
'Mahatapa'. In the same manner, all the austerities that are observed during 
Chaturmas attain greater importance. 
Lord Brahma then went on to elucidate the proper method of performing the 
rituals of 'Shodashopachar'--' "A particular 'mahasukta' of Yajurveda consisting 

1090 
 



of sixteen ' richas are chanted while worshipping Lord Vishnu. Similarly richas 
like 'sahastra-sheersha purushah' and fifteen others are considered to be 
most appropriate for the worship of almighty Vishnu. First of all, a devotee 
should perform the ritual of 'nyas' by mentally associating all the sixteen 
richas with different organs of the body as per the instructions given in the 
smritis. The same rituals of 'nyas' are then performed on the idol of Lord 
Vishnu or Shaligram. After that an invocation is made to Lord Vishnu by 
chanting the first richa of Purush sukta--'Sahashtra sheersha Purushah' with a 
slight modification i.e. by adding 'om' in the beginning of the mantra. 
Similarly, Lord Vishnu and other 'Parshads' should be installed at the place of 
worship by chanting the second richa- 'Purush evedam'. With the chanting of 
third richa, Lord Vishnu's lotus feet are washed after which 'ardhya' is offered 
with the holy water collected from all the seven seas and other holy rivers. 
Subsequently, the ritual of 'achaman' is performed amidst the chanting of fifth 
richa. 
The ritual of ablution is then performed in which the idol of Lord Vishnu is 
bathed amidst the chanting of the sixth richa. The idol is adorned with 
beautiful apparels amidst the chanting of seventh richa. 
Similarly, a sacred thread is offered to Lord Vishnu amidst the chanting of 
eighth richa while sandalwood paste is smeared on the idol amidst the 
chanting of ninth richa. Subsequently, amidst the chanting of tenth, eleventh, 
twelfth and thirteen richas, flowers, incense, lighted lamp and naivedya are 
offered to the deity respectively. Naivedya should consist of cereals. While 
performing 'arti' the fourteenth richa should be chanted. A devotee should 
then circumambulate around the idol amidst the chanting of fifteenth richa. 
Imagining himself as an inseparable part of Lord Vishnu, he should meditate 
amidst the chanting of the sixteenth richa."  
 
IV. KASHI KHAND –‘Varanasi section’ 
VIDHYACHAL OBSTRUCTS THE PATH OF SURYA  

1091 
 



Once, Sage Vyasa narrated the following tale to all the assembled sages-- ' 
Once, while wandering about, sage Narada arrived at Vindhyachal mountain. 
He was received with great honour and respect by Vindhyachal mountain. But, 
when the time arrived for Narada to take his leave, he took a deep sigh, which 
made Vindhyachal extremely perplexed and he asked Narada if anything was 
wrong. Narada replied--' Your rival-Meru mountain is superior to you in every 
respect and this is the fact I am lamenting about. My deep sigh is just the 
indication of my worried state of mind.' Vindhyachal mountain was filled with 
inferiority complex and started waiting for an opportunity when he could 
prove his superiority to Meru mountain. He thought--' Perhaps Narada was 
right for even Lord Surya has great respect for Meru's might and this is the 
reason why he circumambulates my adversary. If I am able to beat Meru in 
height then may be Lord Surya would start circumambulating me and this way 
I shall prove my superiority to Meru.'Now, Vindhyachal started increasing his 
height and in a short time its peaks became invisible. 
The fallout of this amazing incident proved to be quite catastrophic for the 
world because even Lord Surya was left stranded at a particular point in the 
horizon. As a result, one part of the earth became too hot for any life to exist. 
Similarly, the other half of the earth became unbearably cold. The time 
became still and everything went haywire in the world. 
All the deities became extremely worried and went to Lord Brahma to seek his 
help. Lord Brahma advised them to go to Kashi and seek help from sage 
Agastya. Deities were pleased at their good fortune of getting a chance to visit 
Kashi. Deities, after reaching Kashi paid a visit to 'Manikarnika teerth' and took 
their bath. Subsequently, they went to Vishwanath temple and worshipped 
Lord Vishwanath. At last, they reached the hermitage of Agastya where he 
was busy worshipping a self made Shivalinga. The entire hermitage was 
crowded with young pupils of Agastya. After the pleasantries having been 
exchanged, sage Agastaya asked the deities about the purpose of their visit. 
AGASTYA ORDERS VINDHYA TO DIMINISH ITS SIZE  

1092 
 



When Agastya learnt of the problem created by Vindhyachal, he agreed to 
help the deities despite fully aware of the fact that once he left Kashi it would 
not be possible for him to see his dearest Kashi once again at least in his 
present birth. Before leaving for Vindhyachal, he sought permission from Lord 
Bhairav. He then reached the place where Vindhyachal had obstructed the 
path of Surya. Lopamudra, his wife accompanied him. 
When Vindhyachal found Agastya starring angrily at him he became scarred 
and immediately minimized his size. Sage Agastya was pleased that his 
objective had been achieved without making any effort but he knew quite 
well that once he left the place Vindhyachal would regain his mammoth size. 
So he decided to do something so that Vindhyachal could not obstruct the 
path of Surya. He worked out a plan according to which he instructed 
Vindhyachal to wait for him until he returned after accomplishing his 
pilgrimage. Vindhyachal agreed assuming that Agastya would return in a short 
time. 
Vindhyachal thanked his good fortune of escaping Agastya's wrath, which 
could otherwise have threatened his very existence. Sage Agastya then went 
away never to return and Vindhyachal kept on waiting for his arrival. This way, 
the path being cleared, Surya was once again able to move freely on its orbit 
without any problem and as a result normalcy returned to the world. 
On the other hand, Agastya who was not at all happy leaving his dearest Kashi 
was desperate to get there back as soon as possible. But, he knew that his 
wish was going to remain unfulfilled. 
While wandering about, he reached Kolapur where he worshipped Goddess 
Mahalakshmi. When Goddess Mahalakshmi appeared, he asked her whether 
he would ever be able to reach Kashi in his present life. Goddess Mahalakshmi 
replied--'Your wishes will be fulfilled in the coming nineteenth dwapar, when 
you would incarnate as Vyasa and would contribute a great deal in the 
propagation of the Vedas and Puranas. There is a sacrosanct place of Kartikeya 
not very far from here. Go there and pay your obeisance to Lord Kartikeya and 
he would unravel the mysterious aspects of Kashi to you.'Sage Agastya and his 

1093 
 



wife Lopamudra then went to the mountain called Sri Shail, where Kartikeya 
lived at that time. 
KASHI -THE SACROSANCT PLACE OF PILGRIMAGE 
 After travelling for sometime, both of them arrived near Sri Shail mountain. 
Pointing his finger towards the mountain, Agastya told his wife--'One, who has 
a good fortune of seeing the peaks of this mountain, never takes a second 
birth.' Lopamudra replied in amazement--' If the sight of this mountain was 
capable of giving salvation then why do you long for Kashi?' Sage Agastya then 
went on to clarify that there were many other holy places capable of giving 
salvation. Prayag is one such place. It is capable of bestowing all the four 
'Purusharth' to manDharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. Apart from Prayag, 
there are many more holy places like Naimisharanya, Kurukshetra, 
Gangadwar, Avanti, Ayodhya, Mathura, Dwarka, Badrikashram, Purushottam 
kshetra which are capable of giving salvation to a man. But none of these 
places can match Kashi because Kashi is incomparable. 
LORD KARTIKEYA DESCRIBES THE MAJESTY OF KASHI  
Sage Agastya and his wife Lopamudra circumambulated Sri Shail Mountain 
and climbed up Lohit mountain where they found Lord Kartikeya. Both of 
them eulogized Kartikeya by singing Vedic hymns in his praise. Lord Kartikeya 
was extremely pleased by their devotion and said- 'O revered sage! You can 
understand Kashi's importance by the fact that, though I am capable of 
reaching any place according to my wish but still, here I am doing this austere 
penance for the attainment of Kashi. I must confess that I have not been 
successful in my efforts till date. If any body thinks that he can attain to kashi 
just by performing austerities than he is totally wrong. 
Kashi can never be attained to until and unless one has the blessing of Lord 
Mahadeva. And one who is fortunate enough to have reached Kashi must 
under no circumstances leave it till he is alive. O Agastya! You are blessed 
because you had the good fortune of residing at Kashi. Please allow me to 
touch your body, which has acquired holiness due to its proximity to Kashi.' 

1094 
 



Having said this, Kartikeya touched different parts of Agastya's body as if he 
were touching the sacred soil of Kashi.'  
THE ORIGIN OF KASHI  
Sage Agastya asked Lord Kartikeya how the sacrosanct place, Kashi came into 
being. He also asked how Kashi became famous as a place capable of giving 
salvation to a man. 
Lord Kartikeya revealed to Agastya that once Parvati had asked Lord Shiva the 
same question. 
Lord Shiva had told her-- ' At the time of deluge when every thing had 
submerged in the ocean and darkness prevailed everywhere, only Brahman, 
the embodiment of truth existed at that time and nothing else. Brahman, the 
absolute truth is indescribable and inexpressible. No name can be attributed 
to Him. He is the absolute truth, the ultimate knowledge, the infinite, the 
omnipresent and the eternal bliss. Though basically formless He attained a 
form on account of His own wish. 
That form is none other than me. Later on I created Prakriti from my body. All 
three of us (Shiva, Parvati and Kashi) manifested simultaneously by the grace 
of 'Adi Purusha' (The Almighty God).' Continuing with the tale of Kashi's 
greatness, Kartikeya told Agastya- ' There is no holy place as dear to Lord Shiva 
as Kashi, which is not abandoned by him as well as his consort-Parvati even at 
the time of deluge. Lord Shiva named this holy place- Ananda van, because it 
gave immense joy to him. Subsequently, Lord Shiva and Goddess Jagdamba 
put a glance on the left portion of their respective bodies as the result of 
which a divine entity manifested himself who was none other than Lord 
Vishnu and who was named Purushottam by Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva after 
blessing Purushottam went away. Later on, Lord Vishnu created a divine 
reservoir with his sudarshan chakra and filled it up with his sweat. He then 
engaged himself in an austere penance. 
Lord Shiva once again appeared along with Parvati and blessed Vishnu by 
saying- ' This holy place will become famously known as Manikarnika because 

1095 
 



this is the very place where I had once lost my diamond ear-ring.' Lord Vishnu 
made a request to Shiva -- 'May this place fulfill the wishes of those who seek 
salvation. Since it is blessed with your eternal presence hence its another 
name would be Kashi.' Lord Shiva assured Vishnu by saying- 'This sacrosanct 
place is very dear to me and no event takes place here against my wish. Even 
if a person living here happens to be a sinner he has nothing to fear because I 
protect him. One who lives far from Kashi but remembers it with reverence 
becomes absolved of all his sins.' There is a magnificent Shiva-linga at Kashi 
famously known as Kashi Vishwanath. Here is situated one of the twelve 
Jyotirlingas. Just as the Sun is visible in the whole world despite its presence at 
a particular point in the horizon, in the same manner Kashi has its influence 
throughout the length and breadth of the world. 
V. AVANTI KSHETRA KHAND  
SANATKUMAR GLORIFIES MAHAKAL TERTH  
Once, Goddess Parvati requested Shiva to describe the significance of 
Mahakal teerth. Lord Shiva replied- " 
Once, Sanatkumar- one of the manasputras of Lord Brahma had gone to his 
father's abode, situated at a place near Meru mountain. Sage Vyasa arrived 
there and asked him the same question. 
Sanatkumar had revealed to him that all kinds of sins loosed their evil 
influence at Mahakal teerth. He had also told him that it was called 'Peetha' 
because Matrikas had their abode over there. Anybody, who is fortunate of 
leaving his mortal body at this holy-place, is freed from the vicious cycles of 
birth and death." This place is very dear to Lord Shiva and is also called by 
various other names like Ekamrak-van, Mahakal-van and Vimukti-kshetra. 
KAPAL MOCHAN 
Once, Lord Shiva arrived at Mahakal forest with a skull in his hand. All the 
trees and vegetation were delighted to find him in their midst. They requested 
Lord Shiva to remain their forever. Lord Shiva told them that it was not 
possible for him to stay there forever but on being requested once again 

1096 
 



agreed to stay there for at least a year. After one year, when the time for 
departure came he released the skull from his hand as a memorial. 
When Lord Brahma came to know of this incident, he instructed all the deities 
to reach Mahakal forest without wasting any time so that a grand yagya could 
be performed at the place where Shiva had left the skull. All the deities went 
to the said place and worshipped Lord Shiva by employing the rituals of 
Pashupat vrata, which Lord Brahma had taught them. Lord Shiva became 
pleased by their devotion and said-- ' Perhaps you all are not aware that there 
was a specific objective behind my act of releasing the skull from my hand. 
This act of mine was done to protect your lives but it seems you are unaware 
of its significance. In a way, all of you have already received my blessings in 
advance for your deep devotion. What else do you wish for?' Deities were 
amazed by Shiva's statements and were wondering what Shiva was trying to 
convey. So, they requested Shiva to unravel the mystery so that they could 
understand what he meant to say. Lord Shiva told them- 'The followers of 
Maya were planning to kill you while you were busy doing penance but no one 
of you was aware of their evil motive. I came to know about this in my deep 
state of meditation and dropped the skull from my hand. As soon as the skull 
touched the ground a thunderous sound was made as the result of which all 
the demons were killed instantaneously.' All the deities thanked Lord Shiva for 
protecting their lives. In course of time this particular place became famous as 
Kapal mochan temple and is presently situated in Ujjain. 
VARIOUS NAMES OF UJJAINIPURI  
Once, Sage Vyasa requested Sanatkumar to reveal why Ujjainipuri was known 
by various names like Kanakshringa, Kushasthali Avanti and Padmavati. 
Sanatkumar replied-- ' 
Once, Lord Brahma and Lord Shiva arrived at Ujjainipuri in search of Lord 
Vishnu, who had disappeared from his abode. To their pleasant surprise they 
found Lord Vishnu staying there. Both of them requested Vishnu to allow 
them to stay at Ujjainipuri and said- ' O Lord! When did you create such a 

1097 
 



magnificent place with golden mountain peaks? Allow us to live in this 
beautiful city for we can not live in your separation.' Lord Vishnu requested 
Brahma to make his abode in the northern part of the city while Shiva was 
told to make southern part as his abode. Lord Vishnu then told them- ' Since 
you have referred to this place as a city of golden mountain peaks therefore 
from now onwards it would become famous as 'Kanchan Shringa' (golden 
peaks)'. 
Sanatkumar then went on to explain why Ujjainipuri was also called Kusha 
sthali-' Having created the world, Lord Brahma requested Lord Vishnu to 
nurture it. Lord Vishnu agreed on the condition that Lord Brahma provided 
him a pious place on the earth from where he could perform his duty. Brahma 
then picked up a handful of kusha grass and threw down on the earth. This 
way Lord Vishnu performed his duty as the nurturer of the world sitting on the 
seat of Kusha grass. This is the reason why this place came to be known as 
Kusha sthali.' Sanatkumar then described how Ujjainipuri also came to be 
known as Avanti puri-'  
Once, after being defeated by the demons, deities fled to Meru mountain. 
Later on they went to Lord Brahma and sought his help. Lord Brahma took all 
the deities to Lord Vishnu. Hardly had they reached the abode of Vishnu and 
offered their obeisance, then they heard a heavenly voice- 'There is a 
sacrosanct place called Kushasthali in the forest of Mahakal van. This holy 
place is graced by the presence of Lord Mahadeva. Go there and engage 
yourself in austerities and you will certainly become the master of the heaven 
once again.' Subsequently, all the deities went to a place called 
Paishachmochan situated in Kushasthali and engaged themselves in various 
austerities. As prophesized by Vishnu, the deities indeed defeated the demons 
and became the ruler of heaven. The term 'Avan' means 'the protector' and 
since it had protected the deities hence it became famous as Avanti. 
Sanatkumar also described how Kushasthali also came to be known as Ujjaini-- 
' 

1098 
 



Once, a demon named Tripur did an austere penance to please Lord Brahma. 
When Brahma appeared he expressed his wish of becoming immortal. Lord 
Brahma fulfilled his wish as the result of which Tripur became arrogant and 
started tormenting the deities. The deities sought the help of Lord Shiva, who 
assured them that he would kill the demon. Subsequently, Lord Shiva did kill 
Tripur with his most lethal weapon 'pashupat ashtra' after a fierce battle. The 
place where this incident took place became famous as Ujjaini because of the 
fierce battle fought between Shiva and Tripur. 
Continuing with the tale which described the reason why Ujjainipuri also came 
to be known as Padmavati, Sanatkumar told Vyasa--'During the time of ocean 
churning ambrosia had also emerged from the ocean bed along with many 
other valuable things. The demons wanted to drink ambrosia so that they 
could become immortal but the deities were against this idea. Very soon, the 
arguments turned into a major dispute and both the sides started quarrelling. 
Narada requested Lord Vishnu to do something in this regard. Lord Vishnu 
disguised himself as a beautiful lady and was successful in infatuating the 
demons. Finally, he started giving ambrosia to the deities who after drinking it 
became immortal. A demon named Rahu was sitting in the rows of the deities 
after changing his guise. Lord Vishnu was unable to recognize Rahu and gave 
some ambrosia to him mistaking him to be a deity. But, hardly had Rahu 
gulped down Ambrosia and before it could reach down his throat, Vishnu 
severed his head. Rahu's head became immortal as the result of ambrosia's 
influence. This incident had taken place at Mahakal forest. 
Later on all the deities distributed the whole wealth, which had emerged from 
the ocean among themselves. This is the reason why Ujjainipuri came to be 
known as Padmavati because Padma is another name of Goddess Lakshmi. 
THE GRANDEUR OF AVANTIPURI  
Sanatkumar says-'Once, Parvati requested Lord Shiva to explain why 
Avantipuri was considered so holy by the devotees. Lord Shiva told her that it 
was so because there were numerous holy places situated over there. Lord 
Shiva had told her-- 'There are four holy rivers flowing through the different 

1099 
 



regions of Avantipuri- Kshipra, Divya-nav, Neelganga and Gandhavati. There 
are temples belonging to eighty four Shivalingas, eight Bhairavas, eleven 
Rudras, Twelve Adityas, six Ganeshas and twenty four Goddesses. Not only 
this there are also temples of Lord Vishnu and Brahma. Avantipuri is spread in 
the radius of one yojan. There are temples belonging to ten different 
incarnations of Lord Vishnu- Vasudev, Anant, Balaram, Janardan, Narayan, 
HRishikesh, Varaha, Dharnidhar, Vaman and Lord Vishnu himself taking rest 
on Sheshnag. Apart from these there are many other holy places situated at 
Avantipuri, which enhances its sanctity and holiness. 
THE DESCENT OF NARMADA  
Explaining the reason why Narmada had to descend down to earth, Sutji 
narrated a tale to the assembled sages-- ' 
Once, Sage Markandeya was taking rest at the bank of river Narmada where 
Yudhisthira accompanied by Draupadi arrived there. Yudhisthira curiously 
asked Markandeya about the reason he had chosen the bank of Narmada as 
his resting place when there were so many other holy places of greater 
significance. Sage Markandeya recounted a tale, which said how some sages 
had requested king Pururva to bring down river Narmada to the earth so that 
the whole world becomes liberated from its sins. Describing the holiness of 
Narmada, sages had told Pururava- ' The holy Narmada is capable of liberating 
the whole world from its sin. So, you should find means so that Narmada 
descends down to earth.' Later on, Pururva did an austere penance to please 
Shiva. When Lord Shiva appeared before him, Pururva expressed his wish. 
Shiva instructed Narmada to descend down to earth but she told him that she 
needed a base for that to happen. Lord Shiva then instructed Paryank- the son 
of Vindhyachal mountain to hold Narmada while she descended down to 
earth. Prayank agreed to do that and this was how Narmada came down on 
earth. Initially, the whole world was flooded with the waters of Narmada but 
at the request of the deities she minimized her size. Narmada blessed Pururva 
and instructed him to perform the rituals of tarpan in the name of his 
ancestors so that they became liberated from their sins. Pururva complied and 

1100 
 



thus by performing tarpan liberated all his ancestors.' Having finished his tale, 
Markandeya told Yudhisthira that one who takes a holy dip in Narmada 
attains virtues similar to that of performing Ashwamedh yagya. 
NARMADA MARRIES PURUKUTSU  
Markandeya said--'O Yudhisthira! King Purutkutsu was Samudra in his 
previous birth and had been cursed by Brahma. The descent of Narmada on 
earth made the deities extremely delighted and they requested Narmada to 
give them the privilege of experiencing her divine touch. But, Narmada 
refused to give them that privilege on the pretext that she was still unmarried 
and it would not be proper for her to do so. All the deities then requested her 
to become the consort of Purukutsu to which she agreed. This way, Narmada 
married Purutkusu. After getting married, Purutkutsu requested her to 
liberate his ancestors so that they could attain to heaven. Narmada readily 
obliged and this way Purutkutsu contributed in his ancestors' departure to 
heaven.'  
MANU RECEIVES A BOON FROM NARMADA 
Markandeya said--'Manu ruled over Ayodhya during Swayambhuva 
manvantar. One day, while he was going to sleep, he heard a peculiar sound, 
as if numerous small bells were ringing. He was perplexed and could not 
ascertain the cause of that sound so he asked sage Vashishtha about this. Sage 
Vashishtha made a revelation by which Manu was startled. Sage Vashishtha 
told him-- 'There is a holy place called Tripuri situated at the bank of river 
Narmada. The sound that you heard last night emanated from the small bells 
attached to number of aircraft kept on the roofs of the residences of such 
people who are virtuous. O king! Only Narmada is capable of giving salvation 
to lowly of sinners.' Manu was highly impressed and decided to go to Tripuri 
along with his whole clan. All of them took holy dips in the Narmada and 
became liberated from all their sins. Manu performed a grand yagya at the 
bank of Narmada to which all the sages and hermits were invited. Narmada 
became pleased by his devotion and expressed her willingness to fulfill any 
wish that Manu desired. 

1101 
 



Manu requested her help in bringing down Ganga and other holy rivers to 
earth. Narmada blessed him and said-- 'In the first half of Treta yuga, one of 
your descendants named Bhagirath would accomplish this great feat of 
bringing down holy Ganga to earth. In the second half of the same era other 
holy rivers like Kalindi, Saraswati, Sarayu, and Mahabhaga would also manifest 
themselves. '  
JAMDAGNI RECEIVES KAMDHENU  
Markandeya told Yudhisthira-- 'Sage Jamdagni was a great devotee of Shiva 
and he lived in Narmadapur. He spent his day chanting mantras in the praise 
of Lord Shiva.  
Once, he performed an austere penance, which lasted for a month. 
Ultimately, Shiva manifested himself from the Siddheshwar Linga and 
appeared before him. Lord Shiva asked Jamdagni to ask for any thing he 
wished for. Jamdagni expressed his desire to have Kamdhenu so that he could 
perform his rituals and other religious obligations without any problem. Lord 
Shiva blessed Jamdagni and disappeared. The next moment, Jamdagni found 
Kamdhenu standing in front of his hermitage. 
Now, Jamdagni got everything that he wished for. This way, he was a happy 
and contented life until one fateful day when he was killed by a greedy king 
named Kartaveerya, who subsequently took Kamdhenu along with him. While 
the greedy king was still on his way, Kamdhenu cursed him that very soon not 
only he but the whole caste of Kshatriya would be liquidated by Parshuram, 
Jamdagni's son, as punishment for having committed such a ghastly sin of 
killing an innocent sage. After cursing Kartaveerya, Kamdhenu went to her 
original abode, the heaven. 
Later on, when Parshuram learnt of his father's slaying, he liquidated 
Kartaveerya and the whole caste of Kshatriya as had been prophesized by 
Kamdhenu. 
DESCRIPTION OF HELL  

1102 
 



Yudhisthira requested Markandeya to describe what a sinner had to go 
through in Yamaloka and also that what kind of a person should be considered 
as the most ghastly sinner.Markandeya replied: 'Donating food to needy 
people is an extremely virtuous deed and there is no virtuous deed greater 
than this. A person who donates cereals can be aptly called 'Annadata'- one 
who provides food. One who has never donated cereals in his lifetime is 
definite to go to hell and has to tread an arduous path leading to it that is 
ridden with prickly thorns, pointed nails and other sharp objects. The entire 
path leading to hell is extremely dark and covered with large pits. 
The path is also covered with unbearably hot sand spilled all over the place. 
The sinner is forcibly taken by the Yamdoots despite their reluctance. The 
sinners repent for the sins they have committed but it is of no use to them, as 
they will have to reap the fruits of their evil deeds. They have to undergo all 
sorts of painful experience- they are forced to pass through fire and pits full of 
filth. 
Those sinners who have atoned for their sins are not treated so harshly by the 
Yamdoots. After they appear before Yamraj, Chitragupta reminds them of all 
the sins they had committed. 
Thereafter, Yamraj orders his attendants to purify the sinners by putting them 
into the ocean of the Hell. There are Twenty-eight types of hells- Atighora, 
Raudra, Ghortama, Dukhjanani, Ghorrupa, Tarantara, Bhayanaka, Kalratri, 
Ghatotkata, Chanda, Mahachanda, Chndakolahala, Prachanda, Varagnika, 
Jaghanya, Avaraloma, Bhishni, Nayika, Karala, Vikarala, Vajravinshti, Asta, 
Panchkona, Sudirgha, Parivartula, Saptabhauma, Ashtabhauma and 
Deerghamaya. Each of the latter hell is more horrific than the former. Sinners 
have to undergo unbearable pain and sufferings in the hell. They are tied up 
by very hot iron chains and hanged down from trees. 
Yamdoots attach hot and heavy iron balls to their feet and thrash them with 
hot iron rods. They are then put into wells of filth. The tongue of a liar is 
rooted out with brute force and a person, who shows disrespect to his elders 
and teachers, his mouth is filled with hot sands and boiling oil. Similarly 

1103 
 



immoral women, who do not fulfill their obligation towards their husbands, 
are thrown into a horrific hell named Lohakumbh. O Yudhisthira! A man's life 
is too short and uncertain. One is not sure when his final call would come. So, 
one should try to lead a virtuous life to the best of his ability.'  
 
VI. NAGAR KHAND  
TRISHANKU CURSED BY VASHISHTHA'S SONS  
Sutji once narrated the following tale to the assembled sages- In ancient times 
there lived a mighty king named Trishanku. He belonged to Suryavanshi 
dynasty. One day, he asked Sage Vashishtha whether there was any such 
Yagya by performing which, he would be entitled to go to heaven with his 
physical form. Sage Vashishtha laughed at his naive query and told him that 
there was no such Yagya by performing which a man could go to the heaven 
with his mortal body. But, Trishanku was not satisfied by Vashishtha's answer 
and so he went to ask the same question to Vashishtha's sons who were one 
hundred in number. But even they corroborated their father's statement. 
Trishanku got infuriated and threatened them that he would appoint 
somebody else as his royal priest to get the same yagya performed as they all 
lacked the required knowledge and competence. Vashishtha's sons also got 
angry and cursed him to become a 'chandal' (a low caste person). The next 
moment Trishanku indeed became a 'chandal' and was so much ashamed of 
himself that he decided to go to the forest after relinquishing his throne. He 
called his son -Harishchandra and narrated the whole tale of his misery. 
Before going to the forest he appointed Harishchandra as his successor.One 
day, while wandering in the forest, Trishanku met Sage Vishwamitra and 
narrated his miserable tale to him. Since Vishwamitra was a competitor of 
Vashishtha, he took it as a golden opportunity to prove his superiority to his 
adversary. So, he assured Trishanku that he had the requisite power to send 
anybody to heaven and said- ' I shall help you perform a grand yagya, which 
would allow you to attain to the heaven with your mortal body. But before 
that you will have to go on a pilgrimage so that you become pure once again.' 

1104 
 



Both Vishwamitra and Trishanku set out on a pilgrimage and reached 
'Arbudachal' where they met sage Markandeya. 
After the pleasantries were over, Markandeya asked Vishwamitra about 
Trishanku, who was standing quietly. Vishwamitra revealed everything to 
Markandeya and said - I had taken a vow not to take rest until Trishanku got 
absolved of the evil influence of the curse given by Vashishtha's sons'. I have 
not achieved success in my objective till date, so I have decided to renounce 
the world. 
Seeing Vishwamitra in such desperation, Markandeya consoled him and 
instructed him to go to Hatkeshwar where taking a holy dip in Patal Ganga 
would purify Trishanku and solve all his problems.Both Vishwamitra and 
Trishanku reached 'Hatkeshwar' and bathed in the holy Patal Ganga. To his 
pleasant surprise, Trishanku found that he had indeed become purified and all 
the lowly qualities had vanished within no time. Vishwamitra was delighted as 
the first condition for Trishanku's departure to Heaven had been met. He 
decided to go to Brahma loka to request Lord Brahma to be present at the 
Yagya which was to be performed for the success of Trishanku's departure to 
heaven. But before leaving, he instructed Trishanku to make all the necessary 
preparations before his return. 
After reaching Brahma loka, Vishwamitra narrated the whole story to Lord 
Brahma and requested him to grace the Yagya by his presence. Lord Brahma 
told him that it was just impossible for any mortal to attain to heaven in his 
physical form but he added that if Trishanku performed the rituals diligently 
then he would certainly attain to heaven after his death. 
Vishwamitra did not like Brahma's words and challenged him that no power 
on earth could stop him from sending Trishanku to Heaven. 
VISHWAMITRA COMMENCES NEW CREATION  
Vishwamitra then instructed Trishanku to make preparation for the Yagya. 
After everything was ready, Vishwamitra initiated Trishanku into the rituals of 
Yagya. Trishanku made offerings in the sacrificial fire at the instruction of 

1105 
 



Vishwamitra. The deities readily accepted all the offerings that were made to 
them. This way, the yagya continued for twelve long years but still there was 
no sign of Vishwamitra's desire of sending Trishanku to heaven getting 
fulfilled. Trishanku became dejected and told him about his decision to 
renounce everything and spend rest of his life doing penance as chances of 
attaining to heaven appeared impossible. He was also sure that Vashishtha's 
sons would make fun of him if he went back to his kingdom without achieving 
his objective. But, Vishwamitra consoled him and said--'No power on earth 
can stop you from going to heaven with your physical form. You just need to 
have some patience and your desire will be certainly fulfilled.' Vishwamitra 
decided to please Lord Shiva as he was convinced that Shiva was the only 
deity who could help him achieve his goal. He eulogized Shiva by singing 
hymns of praise in his name. At last, Shiva appeared before him and expressed 
his desire of fulfilling any wish of Vishwamitra. Vishwamitra requested Shiva 
to bestow on him the power of creation just like Brahma had. Lord Shiva 
blessed him and disappeared.Now, Vishwamitra was eager to test his powers 
so he began creating different things. He created Sun, Moon, Stars, Oceans, 
Rivers, so on and so forth. In a short time the whole world was filled by his 
creations resulting into chaos all over. As the result of his creations, every 
natural thing became double in number- one that had already been created 
by Brahma and the second created by Vishwamitra. Now there existed two 
suns, two moons, so on and so forth. Vishwamitra's amazing deeds had 
catastrophic fallout on the natural course of events. 
Deities were scarred and rushed to seek the help of Lord Brahma. They told 
Brahma that if Vishwamitra was not stopped the whole world was doomed to 
destruction. Lord Brahma appeared before Vishwamitra and ordered to stop 
doing creations. Vishwamitra told him that he was ready to do that if Brahma 
helped Trishanku attain to heaven with his mortal body. Seeing no other 
option, Brahma accepted Vishwamitra's condition. This way, Vishwamitra was 
able to send Trishanku physically to heaven with the help of Lord Brahma. 
VII. PRABHAS KHAND  

1106 
 



DESCRIPTION OF PURANAS AND UP-PURANAS  
Once, while describing the origin of Puranas, Sutji told the sages who had 
assembled at Naimisharanya--'Lord Shiva had first revealed the contents of 
Skanda Purana to Parvati at Kailash Mountain. Lord Brahma and few other 
deities were also present there at the time when Shiva was narrating the tale. 
Subsequently, Parvati narrated this tale to Skanda, Skanda to Nandi and Nandi 
to sages like Sanak, etc. and finally Sanak narrated it to Vyasa. Now I am going 
to tell you the same tale which Vyasa had narrated to me.' Sutji began by 
saying-' During ancient times, Lord Brahma once did a very austere penance 
resulting into the manifestation of all the four Vedas. Later on, all the eighteen 
Puranas too appeared from his mouth. These eighteen Puranas were- Brahma 
Purana, Vishnu Purana, Shiva Purana, Bhagawat Purana, Bhavishya Purana, 
Narada Purana, Markandeya Purana, Agni Purana, Brahma vaivarta Purana, 
Linga Purana, Padma Purana, Varaha Purana, Skanda Purana, Vaman Purana, 
Kurma Purana, Matsya Purana, Garuda Purana and Vayu Purana. Apart from 
these eighteen main Puranas, there are also similar number of secondary 
Puranas known as UpPuranas. 
These Up-Puranas are - Sanatkumar, Narsimha, Skand, Shiva Dharma, 
Durvasa, Narada, Kapil, Manu, Ushana, Brahmand, Varun, Kalika, Maheshwar, 
Samb, Saura, Parashar, Marich and Bhargava.' Sutji then went on to describe 
the other features of each Purana-' Brahma Purana contains ten thousand 
shlokas in it whereas Padma Purana contains fifty-five thousand shlokas. 
Similarly, there are twenty-three thousand shlokas in Vishnu Purana. Vayu 
Purana contains the tales related with Lord Shiva and it contains twenty-four 
thousand shlokas in it. Similarly the remaining Puranas like Bhagawat, Narada, 
Markandeya, Agni, Bhavishya, Brhmavaivarta, Linga, Varaha, Skanda, Vaman, 
Kurma, Matsya, Garuda and Brahmanda Purana contain  18,000, 25,000, 
9,000, 16,000, 14,500, 18,000, 11,000, 24,000, 81, 100, 10,000, 17,000, 
14,000, 18,000, and  12,200 shlokas respectively.' Sutji told the sages that all 
the Up-Puranas owe their origin to the main Puranas which are eighteen in 
number. He also revealed to them that they could be categorized into three 

1107 
 



main types- Satvik, Rajas and Tamas. Satvik Puranas contain the tales of Lord 
Vishnu while Rajas Puranas contain the tales of Brahma and Tamas Puranas 
contain the tales of Agni and Rudra. 
One of the chief characteristics of Puranas is that each of them is divided into 
five sections- 'Sarg' (Description of how creation began), 'Pratisarga', 'Vansh' 
(Description of prominent dynasties), 'Manvantar', and 'Vanshanucharit' (Tales 
related with the descendants of the famous sages). 
PRABHAS TERTH  
On being asked by the sages about the prominent places of pilgrimage, Sutji 
named many holy places but according to him Prabhas Teerth was the crown 
of all the places of pilgrimage and was incomparable. Recounting a tale when 
Parvati had once asked Lord Shiva the same question, Sutji said-- 'At that time 
Shiva had told Parvati that Prabhas Kshetra was supreme among all the holy 
places and capable of liberating a man from all his sins. He had also told her 
that due to prevalence of sins in Kaliyuga people would not attain virtues 
despite going on pilgrimages. 
Shiva had also told her that this was the reason why he had created numerous 
holy places and kept them secret so the holiness of these places remained 
intact. I have manifested myself in the form of a divine Shivalinga at Prabhas 
kshetra. The whole universe has originated from it and merges into it 
ultimately at the time of deluge. The Shivalinga is called Somanath and very 
few people are aware of it's existence. This Shivalinga continue to exist since 
it's manifestation in a particular kalpa named Bhairav long ago. Unfortunately, 
people of Kali yuga under the influence of all pervading ignorance would fail 
to recognize the importance of holy places. Such people would try to demean 
the value of holy places and make fun of those people who go on pilgrimages. 
Being blinded by their superficial intelligence they would try to find faults with 
rituals and religion. Such would be the condition of the mortals in Kali yuga 
that they would criticize everything that is religious and spiritual in nature. 
How can one expect from these unfortunate people of Kali yuga to 
understand the significance of Prabhas kshetra and which is revered even by 

1108 
 



me?' Parvati, who had been listening to the tale with rapt attention, became 
even more curious to know about Prabhas kshetra. So she requested Lord 
Shiva to shed more light on the other important aspects of this sacrosanct 
place. Lord Shiva, continuing with his description of Prabhas kshetra, said- ' 
This sacrosanct place has temples of three deities on its three sides. To its east 
is situated a grand temple of Surya Narayan while there is a magnificent 
temple of Madhav to it's west. In the same way there is a beautiful temple of 
Goddess Bhavani to the north of Prabhas kshetra and towards it's south lies 
the ocean. This holy place is spread in the area of five yojans and is divided in 
three major areas- Maheshwar, Vaishnav and Brahma. There are about one 
crore temples related with different deities in Vaishnav and Brahma kshetras 
while Maheshwar kshetra contains one and half crore temples. As the name 
implies, each area has been named after one God forming the Trinity. 
Anybody who has the good fortune of living in the central part of Prabhas 
kshetra becomes absolved of all his sins even if he has committed most 
abhorrent sins. 
The significance of this holy place can be understood by the fact that a man 
born there does not take a second birth and attains salvation. One whom 
scholars of the Vedas call 'Kalagni Rudra' is famously known as Bhairav in 
Prabhas kshetra. 
SOMNATH LINGA  
Emphasizing on the significance of Someshwar Linga and its deep association 
with the Vedas, Lord Shiva told Parvati-'The divine Someshwar Linga exists 
since time immemorial and will remain for eternity. This revelation descended 
on me while I was engrossed in a deep state of meditation. Someshwar Linga 
has deep association with the Vedas and it enhances their sanctity by 
establishing itself in each of them at different periods of time during the day. 
During morning time Someshwar Linga establishes itself in the Rigveda, during 
noon in the Yajurveda, during afternoon in the Samaveda and during evening 
time it establishes itself in Atharva veda. 
DIFFERENT NAMES OF SOMNATH  

1109 
 



Parvati curiously asked Lord Shiva about the reason why Somnath was known 
by so many different names. Lord Shiva said- 'Since the time this divine linga 
first manifested itself very few blessed souls had the knowledge of it's 
existence. Brahma has a life span of one kalpa at the end of which even he 
ceases to exist giving way to his successor, a new Brahma. In the same manner 
this divine linga acquires a new name at the end of each kalpa. The present 
kalpa is seventh in order as six kalpas have already passed. The name of the 
present Brahma is Shatanand and this divine linga is presently famous by the 
name of Somnath. Similarly it was famous as Mrityunjay during the time of 
Brahma named Virinchi. During second kalpa this linga was famous as 
Kalagnirudra and the name of Brahma was Padmabhu. The third kalpa had 
Swayambhu as Brahma and the linga was famous as Amritesh. The name of 
the fourth Brahma was Parmeshthi in fourth kalpa and the linga was famous 
as Annamay. In the same way the names of the fifth and sixth Brahma were 
Surajyeshtha and Hemagarbha respectively and the names of the linga during 
their periods were Kritiwas and Bhairav Nath respectively.' Lord Shiva also 
revealed to Parvati that the next kalpa- eighth in order would have 
Chaturmukh as Brahma and the divine linga would be known as Pran 
Nath.Goddess Parvati then asked Shiva about the exact location of the linga in 
Prabhas Kshetra. Lord Shiva told her that the sacrosanct place of Prabhas 
Kshetra was situated between the plains of two rivers Vajrini and Nyankumati. 
He also told her that the eternal linga was not very far from the sea coast. 
Dwelling at length about the good fortunes of those living in Prabhas kshetra, 
Lord Shiva told her- ' Anybody who does not abandon this holy place despite 
his hardships and troubles is certain to attain to my abode. One who has the 
good fortune of dying at Prabhas kshetra attains salvation. There will be 
prevalence of sins in Kali yuga. As a result of this people would experience all 
sorts of hurdles and problems in their lives. To minimize their sorrows and to 
lessen their miseries, I have personally instructed Ganesh not to abandon this 
place even for a moment. Of all the lingas present on the earth, Somnath is 
specially dear to me.'  

1110 
 



SIDDHESHWAR LINGA AND SIDDHA LINGA 
Describing the reason why this sacrosanct place was named Prabhas, Lord 
Shiva told Parvati-- 'I dwell in the entire area stretching between the ocean in 
the south and river Kaureshwari. Being situated at the western coast, this 
entire area is radiated by Surya's light for a relatively longer period of time 
and hence it has been named 'Prabhas' meaning luster. This is the reason why 
there is situated a grand temple of Lord Surya in Prabhas Kshetra. Not far from 
this Surya temple is situated a magnificent temple of Lord Siddheshwar, which 
was famously known as Jaigishavyeshwar in ancient times.' Lord Shiva then 
went on to describe why Siddheshwar was called Jaigishavyeshwar during 
ancient times-' There lived a sage named Jaigishavya in previous kalpa. He 
used to daily worship a Shivalinga named Mahoday, which had manifested on 
its own. Keeping in view Shiva's fondness for ashes, he used to smear it on his 
body hoping to please his deity. Not only this he even slept on ashes. He thus 
led an extremely austere life. At last he was able to please Lord Mahoday by 
his devotion. When Lord Mahoday appeared before him and expressed his 
willingness to fulfill anything he wished but Jaigishavya wanted nothing but 
total devotion in his deity (Mahoday). Lord Mahoday blessed him with 
immortality and said- ' There would be nobody as powerful as you. Your feats 
achieved in spiritual things will be unmatched and you would become famous 
as 'Yogacharya' or teacher of Yoga. One who regularly worships this particular 
linga which you have been worshipping with such deep devotion till now is 
certain to get absolved of all his sins.' Having blessed Yaigishavya thus, Lord 
Mahoday disappeared from his sight. After this incident, Mahoday Linga also 
came to be known as Yaigishavyeshwar. In course of time, when the Kaliyuga 
of that Kalpa arrived, some sages named 'Balkhilyas' had gone to the same 
place and worshipped Lord Mahoday. Similarly, many more sages went there 
and attained 'siddhi' or accomplishment. This is how this linga came to be 
known as 'Siddheshwar' (the Lord of all accomplishments). There are many 
holy places in the vicinity like Siddha Linga, which was installed by Lord Surya. 
Anybody who worships this linga on the auspicious day of trayodashi of the 

1111 
 



bright half of the Hindu month Chaitra attains virtues similar to the 
accomplishment of 'Pundareek Yagya'. 
CHANDRA DEVA EULOGIZES SHIVA  
Parvati asked Lord Shiva about the reason Chandra Deva had to install a 
Shivalinga at Prabhas Kshetra. Lord Shiva replied that Daksha had got married 
twenty seven of his daughters to Chandra Deva. Chandra Deva was very 
attached to Rohini, who was one of them and neglected others. When Daksha 
came to know about this he cursed Chandra Deva as the result of which he 
lost his luster and started waning day by day. The worried Chandra Deva did 
an austere penance for thousand of years to please Lord Shiva. At last Lord 
Shiva became pleased and appeared before him. Subsequently, Chandra Deva 
got a divine Shivalinga installed by Brahma and worshipped it for thousand of 
years. Lord Shiva appeared once again and expressed his willingness to fulfill 
any wish Chandra Deva expressed. Chandra Deva requested Lord Shiva to 
dwell in the very Shivalinga he had been worshipping till then. Lord Shiva 
revealed to him that there was no question of dwelling in the Shivalinga as he 
had never abandoned it in the first place. Chandra Deva had regained his 
luster on account of his arduous penance. Lord Shiva blessed him and said- 
'Since you have regained your luster (Prabha) by dint of your austere penance, 
this holy place will become famous as 'Prabhas Kshetra'. This linga would be 
named upon you and become famous as Somnath Linga.'Having blessed 
Chandra Deva thus, Lord Shiva disappeared. Later on Chandra Deva instructed 
Vishwakarma to build a magnificent temple at the sight. He also built a city 
nearby so that all the priests who were supposed to supervise the rituals of 
worship could live there. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF GETTING ONE'S HEAD TONSURED  
Dwelling on length about the significance of getting one's head tonsured at 
holy places, Lord Shiva told Parvati- 'A man should get his head tonsured 
whenever he gets an opportunity to visit a holy place because hair are 
believed to contain all the sins he has committed. There is a holy place called 
Padma teerth, not far from Somnath temple. A devotee should first get his 

1112 
 



hair removed at Somnath teerth and then immerse them at Padma teerth. 
This way he becomes absolved of all his sins. Women should have a symbolical 
cut of their hair. It is necessary to perform the rituals of tarpan in the names 
of ancestors after the head tonsuring ceremony. 
According to the scriptures, an ocean is considered holy and nobody should its 
holy water in an impure state. While bathing a devotee should chant the 
following mantra-- 'Om namo Vishnu guptaya Vishnu rupaya namah; 
Sannidhye bhava devesh sagare lavanambhasi.' There are about five crore 
Shivalingas submerged in the ocean near Somnath. There are also other holy 
places situated nearby like Agnikunda, Padma sarovar etc. 
THE EMERGENCE OF SARASWATI IN PRABHAS KSHETRA  
On being asked by Parvati about the emergence of river Saraswati at Prabhas 
Kshetra, Lord Shiva narrated the following tale to her-'The holy Sarswati 
flowing in Prabhas kshetra constitutes of five different streams - Harini, 
Vajrini, Nyanku, Kapila and Saraswati. Lord Vishnu once instructed Saraswati 
to carry 'Badwanal' (Submarine fire) and dump it in the ocean near Prabhas 
kshetra. After taking permission from Lord Brahma, her father Saraswati flew 
towards her destination. Ganga became sad at her departure so she asked her 
as to how could she have a glimpse of her now that she was going to such a 
distant place. Saraswati consoled Ganga by saying that she would be able to 
see her whenever she looked eastwards. The swift currents of Saraswati 
penetrated the earth and reached Patal Loka carrying Badwanal along with 
her. She continued to move beneath the ground towards her destination. As 
she reached Prabhas Kashetra, four learned sages, who were well versed in 
Vedas arrived there and invoked Saraswati to give them the privilege of 
separate bath by dividing herself in four different streams. 
The names of these sages were Hiranya, Vajra, Nyanku and Kapil. While 
Saraswati was about to comply with their request, suddenly Samudra arrived 
there and he too expressed the same wish. 

1113 
 



Thus Saraswati divided herself into five different streams- Harini, Vajrini, 
Nyanku, Kapila and Saraswati. Eventually, when Saraswati reached near the 
ocean, Badwanal whom she was carrying was surprised to see the high tides 
rising in the ocean. He thought that the Samudra was frightened of his fury so 
he asked Saraswati-- 'Why is the ocean scarred of me?' Saraswati inflated his 
ego by saying that who would not be scarred of him. Badwanal was pleased 
and wanted to grant her a boon. Saraswati remembered Lord Vishnu, who 
instantly gave his divine appearance in her heart. She narrated the whole 
story and sought his advise. Lord Vishnu advised her to ask Badwanal to make 
his appearance small like the eye of a needle. Saraswati, following the advise 
of Lord Vishnu asked Badwanal to become small like a needle and keep 
sucking the ocean. Subsequently, Saraswati summoned Samudra and told him 
to accept Badwanal to which he agreed. This way Samudra devoured 
Badwanal, who continues to suck the water of the ocean even today as per 
the instructions given by Saraswati. It is believed that tides are nothing but the 
manifestation of Badwanal's exhalations. This was how Saraswati emerged in 
Prabhas kshetra. 
PRABHAS -THE ABODE OF TRINITY GODDESSES  
Lord Shiva revealed to Goddesses Parvati that Prabhas kshetra boasted of 
possessing many more Shivalingas apart from the famous Somnath Shivalinga. 
He also gave names of some of the prominent Shivalingas situated over there 
and said-- 'To the North-East of Somnath temple is situated a grand temple of 
Lord Sarveshvar Deva, who is also famously known as Siddheshwar. 
The reason behind this is that Shivalinga over there had been installed by the 
'siddhas' (accomplished ones) in ancient times. People who are desirous of 
acquiring siddhis throng this holy place and engage themselves in austere 
penance. To the east of Siddheshwar temple is situated one more temple 
called Kapileshwar. It has been named after Sage Kapil, who had installed the 
Shivalinga over there. A Shivalinga named Gandharveshwar is also situated 
nearby. 

1114 
 



This particular Shivalinga had been installed by a gandharva named 
Dhanvahan. To the east of Gandharveshwar temple is situated Vimaleshwar 
temple. It is believed that anybody suffering from tuberculosis gets cured 
after he worships in that temple. Dhandeshwar Linga was installed by Kuber, 
who was bestowed with the lordship of wealth on account of his austere 
penance.' Lord Shiva told Parvati that there were also temples of three 
Goddesses in Prabhas Kshetra apart from Shiva temples. These three 
Goddesses were Mangla, Vishalakshi and Chatwar representing the three 
types of power-will power, power of action and power of knowledge. Lord 
Shiva said-- 'The pilgrimage to Prabhas kshetra is believed to be incomplete 
until and unless these three Goddesses have been worshipped. Goddess 
Mangla represents the power of Lord Brahma (Brahma Shakti) while Goddess 
Vishalakshi that of Lord Vishnu. Goddess Chatwar represents my power. 
Goddess Mangla holds the privilege of getting worshipped first. During ancient 
times Chandrama did an austere penance for thousand of years and all the 
deities including Lord Brahma had gone there to witness his amazing feat. At 
that time Goddess Mangla had blessed them and this was how she got her 
name.' Lord Shiva then went on to describe how Goddess Vishalakshi got her 
name-' A fierce battle had taken place between the deities and demons during 
Chakshus manvantar. Lord Vishnu fought along with the deities and helped 
them in defeating the demons. Demons fled towards the south but were 
chased by the deities. Realizing that it was not easy to annihilate the demons, 
Lord Vishnu remembered Goddess Mahamaya and sought her help. 
Mahamaya appeared instantly and looked at Lord Vishnu with her large eyes. 
This is how she got her name. In the present kalpa she is also known as 
Lalitoma. To the south of Vishalakshi temple is situated the temple of Goddess 
Chatwarpriya. Goddess Chatwarpriya is the saviour of people living in that 
area. 
Anybody who worships her on the auspicious day of Mahanavami with 
appropriate rituals is blessed. 
DWARKA MAHATMYA: SAGES' QUERIES TO PRAHLAD  

1115 
 



Once, few sages asked Sutji about the means by which Lord Vishnu could be 
realized in Kali yuga- the era dominated by sin and decaying moral values. 
Sutji started by describing how Lord Vishnu on seeing the prevalence of sin in 
Dwapar yuga had to take incarnation as Krishna to liberate the world from the 
sinners. He also described in detail all the incidents culminating into the 
killings of many cruel demons -Kaliya serpent, Chanur, Shishupal and ogress 
like Putna. He gave in depth description of the events leading to the war of 
Mahabharata and how the infighting among the mighty Yadavas led to their 
destruction. He told them how a fowler mistook Krishna's feet to be a deer 
and killed him. 
Sutji also told the assembled sages how the magnificent city of Dwarka had 
been submerged in the ocean ultimately. He revealed to them that the 
passing away of Krishna marked the advent of Kali yuga and the situation 
became even worse. On finding how difficult it was to realize Lord Vishnu in 
the Kali yuga- the era dominated by sin, some prominent sages decided to 
seek Lord Brahma's help in this regard. After reaching Brahma loka, they 
eulogized Brahma and received his blessings. Lord Brahma told them to go to 
Patal loka and meet Prahlad, the supreme devotee of Lord Vishnu who 
according to Lord Brahma was in a better position to help them. 
All the sages went to Patal loka as per the instructions given by Lord Brahma. 
There they not only found Prahlad but also the most charitable king-Bali. After 
the pleasantries were exchanged, they came to the real issue and said-- 'We 
are very much distressed by the prevailing situation where it appears that the 
evil forces have overshadowed the virtuous ones. The ways shown by the 
Vedas are no longer in practice and the Brahmins are being tormented by the 
Shudras, who have become the rulers. We have come with a request and a 
desire to know whether there was any possibility of realizing Lord Vishnu in 
this dark era of 'Kali'. If yes then where can we find Lord Vishnu?' THE 
SANCTITY OF DWARKAPURI Prahlad, being an ardent devotee of Vishnu 
himself, understood quite well, the desperation with which a devotee seeks 
his Lord. So he told them-- 'By the grace of Almighty Vishnu, I am revealing to 

1116 
 



you the name of that sacred place which has remained a secret till now. 
Kushasthal Puri is a divine city situated on the western coast. Nearby is the 
place where river Gomti meets the ocean and at this convergent point is 
situated the sacrosanct city called Dwarawati Puri, where you can find Lord 
Vishnu in all his glory of sixteen kalas. Blessed be the Dwarka Puri, which The 
almighty Vishnu has chosen as his abode and where he dwells in his glorious 
Chaturbhuj form. This is the very place, which even liberates the most fallen 
sinner from all his sins. There is a famous temple of Lord Trivikram at the bank 
of river Gomti and not far from this temple is a divine pond. Anybody desirous 
of salvation must bathe in this pond for the fulfillment of his wish. It is 
believed that before leaving for heaven, Lord Krishna had transferred all his 
divine powers into the Trivikram idol. So, there is no place as holy as Dwarka 
and if you are desirous of having a divine glimpse of Lord Krishna then you 
must visit Dwarka.' All the sages thanked Prahlad for sharing his secrets with 
them because nobody else except Prahlad was aware of the fact that Lord 
Vishnu had given Dwarka the privilege of being his abode. These revelations 
made them more curious about Dwarka, so they requested Prahlad to disclose 
how the holy Gomti descended down to Dwarka. 
Prahlad began by describing the virtues of going on a pilgrimage to Dwarka-- 
'The mere resolution of going on a pilgrimage to Dwarka is enough to liberate 
one's ancestors from the tortures of the hells. Each step that a devotee takes 
towards Dwarka gives virtues similar to what is attained by performing 
Ashwamedh Yagya. One who encourages others to go on a pilgrimage to 
Dwarka certainly goes to Vishnu Dham.' Prahlad then switched over to the 
second part of the sages' question and said- 'There is an interesting tale 
describing how Sage Vashishtha had brought down Gomti from the heaven to 
earth. At the time of deluge when the whole world had submerged in water, a 
lotus flower manifested from Lord Vishnu's navel on which was seated 
Brahma. Lord Vishnu instructed him to perform his duty as a creator to which 
Brahma agreed. First of all Brahma created his ten manasputras (Sanak, 
Sanandan,etc.) and sought their help in increasing the population of the world 
by becoming householders. But, all of them were extremely virtuous and did 

1117 
 



not show any inclination towards getting married. Ultimately all of them went 
to the western coast and engaged themselves in austere penance. Their 
penance continued for a number of years after which 'Sudarshan chakra' 
appeared before them. As all of them looked up in bewilderment, they heard 
a heavenly voice -- 'O sons of Brahma! Very soon the almighty Vishnu is going 
to manifest himself. The 'Chakra' you are seeing is his. You all must perform 
the rituals of 'ardhya' in the name of Lord Vishnu to show your reverence 
towards him.' All the Manasputras eulogized Sudarshan-Chakra with deep 
devotion. All of them wished that there were a holy river, with whose water 
they could perform the rituals of ardhya. But to their utter dismay there was 
no such holy river nearby. They then remembered Lord Brahma, who 
immediately understood what they desired. Lord Brahma instructed Ganga by 
saying- ' Ganga! Go to the earth, where you would be known as Gomti. Sage 
Vashishtha will lead you to your destination. Just follow him like a daughter 
follows her father.' Finally, when sage Vashishtha followed by Gomti reached 
their destination, all the Manasputras were delighted. They eulogized Ganga 
and expressed their gratitude to Vashishtha for bringing Ganga on earth. All of 
them thanked Vashishtha by saying- 'Since you have brought Gomti on earth, 
you would be considered as her father.' They offered 'ardhya' to Gomti and 
subsequently eulogized Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu appeared after being 
pleased and blessed them- ' Your unflinching devotion in me has pleased me 
no bound. Since you did this penance with the objective of Moksha 
(salvation), this place would become famous as Moksha Dayak (giver of 
salvation). This sacrosanct place would also be called Chakra teerth because of 
Sudarshan Chakra, who informed you all of my manifestation at Dwarka Puri. I 
assure you that I won't abandon this sacrosanct place even for a moment.'This 
way, all the Manasputras were finally successful in their objective of offering 
ardhya to Lord Vishnu with the holy water of Gomti. At last, Gomti having 
fulfilled her mission for which she had descended down to Earth merged with 
the ocean. Lord Vishnu disappeared from there and Manasputras continued 
to live there. 
Home   

1118 
 



14. GARUDA PURANA  
I. INTRODUCTION  
LORD VISHNU'S INCARNATIONS  
Sutji once reached Naimisharanya in course of his pilgrimage. There he found 
numerous sages engaged in austerities and penance. All of them were 
delighted to find Sutji in their midst and considered it as a God sent 
opportunity to get their doubts related with religious topics cleared. 
Sage Shaunak was also present there and he asked Sutji -- 'O revered sage! 
Who is the creator of this world? Who nurtures it and who annihilates it in the 
end? How can one realize the supreme Almighty? How many incarnations the 
Almighty has taken till now? Please enlighten us on all these things, which are 
shrouded in mystery.' Sutji replied-- 'I am going to reveal to you the contents 
of Garuda Purana, which contains the divine tales of Lord Vishnu. This 
particular Purana is named after Garuda because he was the one who first 
narrated these tales to sage Kashyap. Kashyap subsequently narrated them to 
Sage Vyasa. I came to know about these divine tales from Sage Vyasa. Lord 
Vishnu is the supreme almighty and the source of all creations. He is the 
nurturer of this world and the annihilator as well. Though he is beyond the 
bondage of birth and death yet he takes incarnations to protect the world 
from the tyranny of sinners. His first incarnation was in the form of the eternal 
adolescent Sanatkumar and others who were all celibates and extremely 
virtuous.' 'Lord Vishnu took his second incarnation in the form of a boar 
(Varaha) to protect the Earth from the mighty demon named Hiranyaksha, 
who had abducted her to Patal loka (Nether world). In his third incarnation as 
Narada, he propagated the virtues of 'nishkam karma' (performing one's 
duties without bothering about the results). In his fourth incarnation as Nar-
Narayan, he performed arduous austerities for the protection and 
propagation of Dharma or religiousness. 
Lord Vishnu's fifth incarnation was as Kapil, which he took to protect the 
Sankhya shashtra, which was on the verge of becoming extinct. He took his 

1119 
 



sixth incarnation in the house of Atri and Anusuya as Dattatreya with the 
specific objective of propagating the most secret Brahma vidya to worthy 
people. His disciples included virtuous souls like Prahalad and others. Lord 
Vishnu took his seventh incarnation as the son of Ruchi Prajapati and Akuti 
and was known as Yagya deva. His eighth incarnation was as Rishabh deva- 
the son of Sage Nabhi and Merudevi. 
In this incarnation he established the norms for Grihashtha ashram, which 
later on became the guidelines for every householders. Lord Vishnu took his 
ninth incarnation as Prithu and 'milked' (extracted) various nutrients (cereals, 
pulses etc.) from the Earth who had disguised herself as a cow and thus 
protected the populace from getting starved to death. 
In his tenth incarnation as Matsya (fish), he protected the life of Vaivaswat 
Manu, who would not have survived otherwise. Lord Vishnu took his eleventh 
incarnation in the form of a tortoise (kurma) and held the Mandarachal 
mountain on his back at the time when the ocean was being churned. His 
twelfth incarnation was as Dhanvantari and thirteenth as the most enchanting 
beauty- Mohini to retrieve the ambrosia pot from the possession of the 
demons. He subsequently distributed it among the deities as the result of 
which they became immortal. 
In his fourteenth incarnation, Lord Vishnu manifested himself as 'Nrisimha' 
(partly human and partly lion) and to protect his devotee- Prahlad killed the 
wicked demon Hiranyakashipu by tearing apart his abdomen with his sharp 
claws. His fifteenth incarnation was as Vaman (dwarf) in which he demanded 
all the three worlds from Bali-the most benevolent demon king and then sent 
him to Patal loka. In his sixteenth incarnation as Parshuram, he wiped out the 
whole caste of kshatriyas from the face of the earth for twenty-one times, as 
they had all become immoral. 
In his seventeenth incarnation he was born as Vyasa to Parashar and Satyavati 
and accomplished his mission of propagating the knowledge of Vedas by 
categorizing them into four parts. In his eighteenth incarnation he manifested 
himself as Sri Ram. His nineteenth incarnation was as Krishna and his 

1120 
 



twentieth incarnation as Balram. He will take his twenty-first incarnation as 
Buddha to bring the mankind back to virtuous path by preaching against the 
rituals and proving that it is not proper for a seeker to get bound by them. 
Lord Vishnu would take incarnation as Kalki and will be born to a Brahmin 
named Vishnuyasha to liberate the earth from the sinners.'  
HOW GARUDA PURANA WAS PROPAGATED  
On being asked by the sages as to how did he come to know about the 
contents of Garuda Purana, Sutji told them--' 
Once, I had gone to Badrikashram, where I met Sage Vyasa. I requested him to 
enlighten me on various spiritual matters to which he agreed saying that he 
was going to narrate the tales of Garuda Purana which was first told by Lord 
Brahma to Narada, Daksha Prajapati and myself. Sage Vyasa then told Sutji 
how once he along with Narada, Daksha and Bhrigu had gone to Brahma loka 
to see Lord Brahma. After reaching there, all three of them requested Lord 
Brahma to shed light on the essence of the real knowledge. 
Lord Brahma revealed to them that Garuda Purana contained the essence of 
all the scriptures and Lord Vishnu himself had narrated its divine tales to him 
(Brahma). Describing the incident when Lord Vishnu had told the divine tales 
of Garuda Purana to him as well as Shiva, Lord Brahma said-- 'I once went to 
Kailash mountain accompanied by Indra and other deities. We found Shiva 
engrossed in his meditation. We were amazed and asked him as to who was 
he meditating upon. 
Lord Shiva told us that he was meditating upon the omnipresent, omniscient 
and the omnipotent Vishnu- in whom the entire universe exists. Lord Shiva 
also revealed to us that this was all he knew of Vishnu's power and also that if 
we wanted to know more about him then we will have to ask Lord Vishnu 
himself. So, all of us including Shiva went to Vishnu loka and requested Lord 
Vishnu to clear our doubts on various topics which confused us. Lord Vishnu 
gave a long discourse covering all the major religious topics. 
LORD VISHNU REVEALS HIS OMNIPOTENT NATURE  

1121 
 



Dwelling on length about his power, Lord Vishnu told Shiva-- 'O Rudra! I am 
the Lord of all the deities. I am the one who controls each and every event 
that occurs in the Universe. I am the one whom mortals worship with the 
desire of attaining salvation. The universe would have ceased to exist but for 
me. I am the creator, the nurturer as well as the supreme annihilator. I 
manifest myself in the sacred mantras as well as their meanings. People 
meditate on me. Matter is nothing but a medium through which I manifest 
myself.'  
LORD VISHNU BLESSES GARUDA  
Describing how Garuda pleased him with his deep devotion, Lord Vishnu said-- 
'During ancient times Garuda once did an austere penance to please me. I 
appeared before him and expressed my willingness to fulfil anything that he 
wished for. Garuda wanted to liberate his mother, Vinta from the slavery of 
Kadru-the mother of serpents. He also wanted to avenge his mother's 
humiliation at their hands. He also expressed his desire of becoming immortal 
by having a Purana credited to his name and finally he requested me to give 
him the privilege of becoming my mount. I blessed Garuda as the result of 
which all his wishes were fulfilled.  
Once, on being requested by sage Kashyap, Garuda narrated the divine tales 
of Garuda Purana to him. Sage Kashyap had once brought back a dead tree 
back to life with the help of Garudi Vidya- a sacred mantra found in Garuda 
Purana. Similarly, Garuda too had brought numerous dead creatures back to 
life with the help of same mantra.'  
THE BEGINNING OF CREATION  
Lord Shiva requested Vishnu to shed light on different topics like Sarga 
(world), Pratisarga, Vansh (dynasties), Manvantar (fourteenth part of 
Brahma's day) and Vanshanucharit (genealogy). Lord Vishnu replied--'O Rudra! 
Lord Vasudeva in his incarnation of Nara-Narayan performs his responsibilities 
of the creator, protector as well as the annihilator. Each particle that is found 
in this universe whether perceptible or imperceptible is nothing but the 

1122 
 



medium through which the Almighty makes his presence felt. In the beginning 
of the creation, on account of His will subtle matter of nature (imperceptible) 
came into being. He is the one to whom 'Atma' or 'Purusha' owe its existence. 
Subsequently, intelligence or 'Buddhi' manifested itself from the subtle matter 
of nature, mind or 'Mun' from intelligence, space or 'Akash' from mind, air or 
'Vayu' from Space, Fire or 'Teja' from air, water from 'Teja' and finally the 
earth manifested itself from water.' 'O Rudra! Then came into existence an 
enormous sized egg. I dwell within that egg and so do all the other deities. In 
fact, the whole universe is situated within that egg. The almighty Vishnu 
creates in the form of Brahma, nurtures in the form of Vishnu and annihilates 
in the form of Shiva at the end of each kalpa. The creations of the almighty are 
known as 'Sargas'. First of all, the almighty creates the Mahat tatva, which 
symbolizes his gross quality.Since it was his first creation therefore it was 
called the first Sarga. The second Sarga consisted of the creation of the Panch-
Tanmatras or the five basic elements- Earth (Prithvi), Water (Jala), Fire (Teja), 
Air (Vayu), and Sound (Shabda). These five basic elements are the stuffs from 
which matter is made. The third Sarga namely Vaikarik sarga comprising the 
creation of all the sense organs and the organs of the actions, is basically 
intelligence oriented, because the sense organs can not function without 
intelligence. All these above mentioned three sargas come under the category 
of Prakrit sarga or natural creation.' 'The fourth sarga is known as Mukhya 
sarga or the main creation and consisted of immovable things like mountains, 
trees, etc. The fifth Sarga is known as Tiryak sarga and consisted of animals 
and birds. The sixth sarga comprised the creation of the deities and other 
celestial beings and hence it is also known as Deva sarga. The seventh sarga 
comprised the creation of human beings and hence it was called Manush 
sarga. 
The eighth sarga, which is also called Anugrah sarga, consisted of creations 
that are both 'satvik' (pure) and 'tamasik' (dark) in nature. The ninth sarga is 
called Kaumar sarga.' 'Lord Brahma commenced his creation of supreme 
entities by expressing his will resulting into the manifestation of all the ten 
Manasputras. Subsequently, Lord Brahma created different other entities like 

1123 
 



deities (deva), demons (danav), ancestors (pitra) and human-beings 
(manushya). He then created the Ashuras from his thighs and subsequently 
abandoned his body. The dark qualities emanating from the body resulted 
into the creation of night, a creation that immensely pleased the demons.' 
'Lord Brahma then attained a new physical form, which was pure (satvik) in 
nature. He created the deities from his mouth and once again abandoned his 
body resulting into the creation of day this time. All the deities became 
extremely pleased by this particular creation of Brahma.  
Once again Lord Brahma attained another form and created the 'pitras' and 
when he abandoned that body, 'sandhya' (evening) manifested from it.' 'Lord 
Brahma then attained a form that was 'Rajomaya' in nature and created 
human beings. His abandoning that particular form resulted into the creation 
of 'Pratahkal' (dawn). Subsequently, Lord Brahma created the different 
species like 'yaksha', 'sarpa', 'Gandharva' and 'Apsaras' and many more 
creatures from the different parts of his body. All the four Vedas namely 
Rigveda, Yajurveda, Samveda and Atharvaveda manifested themselves from 
each of Brahma's four mouths. Similarly, all the four castes such as Brahmin, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra manifested from Brahma's mouth, arms, thighs 
and feet respectively.'  
THE BEGINNING OF COPULATIVE CREATION  
'Having created Daksha Prajapati and his wife Prasuti from his right and left 
thumb respectively, Lord Brahma instructed both of them to make their 
contribution in increasing the population with the help of copulative creation. 
In course of time, Daksha Prajapati begot numerous daughters all of whom 
were given in marriage to ten Manasputras.' ' 
Once, Daksha Prajapati had organized a grand Ashwamedha Yagya to which 
he had invited all his daughters and son-in-laws except Sati and Rudra. Sati 
eventually reached her father's place much against the advise of Shiva, who 
was strictly against going to a place uninvited. Shiva's apprehensions were not 
unfounded supposition, as Sati was indeed humiliated by Daksha in front of all 
the esteemed guests. Sati was so deeply hurt by her father's rude behaviour 

1124 
 



and the manner in which he made fun of her husband that she gave up her life 
by jumping into the sacrificial fire. 
When Rudra learnt about Sati's death he cursed Daksha by saying that he 
would loose his divine status and would be born as a human being in the 
lineage of Dhruva. In her next birth, Sati was born as the daughter of Himalaya 
and Mainak. She was once again successful in getting Shiva as her husband by 
virtue of her deep devotion towards Shiva.'  
THE DHRUVA DYNASTY  
Lord Vishnu, continuing with the tales of Garuda Purana told Shiva--'Uttanpad 
had two wivesSuruchi and Suniti. From his former wife he begot a son named 
Uttam, while Suniti gave birth to Dhruva, who became immortal because of 
his unflinching devotion in me. Dhruva had a mighty son named 'Shlishta'. 
Prachinvarhi was Shlishta's son and Dhruva's grandson. Few other prominent 
personalities coming from the lineage of Dhruva were- Udardhi, Divanjaya, 
Ripu, Chakshush, Ruru, Anga, Ven etc. Ven was an atheist and was eventually 
killed by sages for his immoral deeds. Since Ven had no progeny, his death put 
a question mark on his successor. Sages tried to solve this problem by 
churning his thighs, which resulted into the emergence of Nishad. 
But, Nishad went to Vindhyachal to do penance. Seeing their whole effort go 
in vain, all the sages once again churned Ven's hands. This time Lord Vishnu 
himself incarnated as Prithu.' 'Prithu was an extremely kind hearted king and 
cared for his subjects.  
Once, when his kingdom was experiencing an acute famine, he successfully 
extracted the essential nutrients from the earth and thus saved his subjects 
from starvation. Prithu had ten sons prominent among whom were 
Antardhan, Havirdhan, Prachinvarhi and Prachetas. In course of time 
Prachetas married Marisha.' 'Just according to the curse of Shiva, Daksha 
Prajapati was reborn in the clan of Dhruva. His father's name was Prachetas 
and his mother was Marisha. In the beginning, Daksha Prajapati tried to do 
creation by merely expressing his will but his efforts went futile because of 

1125 
 



Shiva's curse. So, he had no option but to take the help of copulative creation 
and to meet his objective he married Asikni- the daughter of Viran. 
In course of time he became the father of one thousand sons, all of whom 
perished while on their impossible mission of finding out the circumference of 
the earth. Actually sage Narada had incited all of them to undertake this 
impossible mission. Daksha though angry did not loose heart and in course of 
time he once again fathered one thousand sons.  
Once again, Narada was successful in convincing them to emulate the deeds 
of their elder brothers. All of them set out on an impossible mission never to 
return. Now, Daksha's anger crossed all limits and he cursed Narada by saying 
that he would take birth as a human for inciting his sons' to death. This is the 
reason why Narada was born as Kashyap's son.' 'In the years to follow, Daksha 
Prajapati begot sixty beautiful daughters from Asikni among whom he gave 
away two daughters in marriage to sage Angira, two to sage Krishashva, ten to 
Dharma, fourteen to sage Kashyap and twenty-eight daughters to Chandrama. 
The names of Krishashva's wives were Supragya and Jaya while Dharma's 
wives were Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanumati, Marutvati, Sankalpa, 
Muhurta, Sadhya and Vishva. The names of Kashyap's wives were Aditi, Diti, 
Danu, Kala, Anayu, Sinhika, Muni, Kadru, Sadhya, Ira, Krodha, Vinta, Surabhi 
and Khaga.' Dharma's wives Vishva and Sadhya gave birth to the Vishvedevas 
and Sadhyaganas respectively. 
Similarly, Marutvati gave birth to Marutvans and Vasu to Vasuganas. Dharma's 
wife named Bhanu gave birth to twelve Bhanus while Muhurta gave birth to 
Muhurtaganas. Lamba gave birth to Ghosh while Yami gave birth to Nagvithi. 
Sankalpa gave birth to Sankalpa. 
Kashyap's wife Aditi gave birth to twelve Adityas while Diti gave birth to two 
sons (demons)- Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha. Diti also had a daughter 
named Sinhika, who was married to Viprachiti. Hiranyakashipu had four sons- 
Anuhlad, Hlad, Prahlad and Sanhlad. Ayushman, Shibi and Bashkal were the 
sons of Sanhlad. Prahlad had a mighty son named Virochan who himself had a 
son named Bali. Bali had one hundred sons in all and Ban was the eldest 

1126 
 



among them. Hiranyaksha had six sons all of whom were very brave and 
valiant. Their names were Utkur, Shakuni, Bhutsantapan, Mahanam, 
Mahabahu and Kalnam. 
Danu had numerous sons who were all very brave-Dwimurdha, Shankar, 
Ayomukh, Shankushira, Kapil, Shambar, Ekachakra, Mahabahu, Tarak, 
Mahabal, Swarbhanu, Vrishaparva, Puloma, Mahasur and the mightiest 
among them-Viprachiti. Puloma and Kalka, both daughters of Vaishwanar 
were married to sage Kashyap. Kashyap had sixty thousand sons (demons) 
from both of them. Demons such as Nighat Kavach came from the lineage of 
Prahlad. Tamra had six daughters and their names were Shuki, Shyeni, Masi, 
Sugrivi, Shuchi and Gridhika. Shuki gave birth to numerous species of birds like 
Shuka (Parrot), Uluka (owls) and Kak(crows). Similarly Shyeni gave birth to 
Shyen (hawks) and Gridhika to Gridh (vultures). Shuchi was the mother of 
aquatic birds while Sugrivi gave birth to various animals like, horses, camels, 
donkeys, etc.' Arun and Garuda were born to Vinta while Sursa and Kadru 
gave birth to serpents. Krodha gave birth to powerful Pishachas, Surabhi to 
cows and buffaloes, Era to various vegetation like, creepers and grass, Khaga 
to Yakshas and Rakshas, Muni to Apsaras and Arishta gave birth to 
Gandharvas. Diti gave birth to fourty-nine Marutganas, all of whom are in fact 
the incarnations of Lord Vishnu. 
II. POWERFUL MANTRAS NAVGRAH MANTRA  
Describing the significance of worshipping Navgraha (nine planets), Lord 
Vishnu told Rudra -- 'One who worships the Navgraha with appropriate rituals 
attains all the four 'purusharth' (objectives of man's life)- dharma (religion), 
artha (money), kama (sex), and moksha (salvation).' He then went on to give 
various mantras related with the Navgrahas, which a devotee should chant 
while worshipping them -- Surya (Sun) -- Om Surya Murtaye Namah. 
Om Hram Hrim Sah Suryay Namah. 
Chandrama (Moon)-- Om Somay Namah.Bhaum (Mars)-- Om Bhaumay 
Namah. 

1127 
 



Buddh (Mercury)-- Om Buddhay Namah. 
Brihaspati (Jupiter)-- Om Vrihaspataye Namah. 
Shukra (Venus)-- Om Shukray Namah. 
Shani (Saturn)-- Om Shanaishcharay Namah. 
Rahu (Dragon's Head)-- Om Rahave Namah. 
Ketu (Dragon's Tail)-- Om Ketave Namah. 
SHIVA MANTRA  
There are various mantras used in the rituals of Shiva worship. A devotee 
should begin by worshipping the 'Asan' (the pedestal) on which the deity is 
seated. There is a specific mantra for this particular ritual- Om Hram Shivay 
Namah. Subsequently, a salutation to Lord Shiva is made by chanting - Om 
Shiva Murtaye Namah. A special ritual named 'Shadanganyas' is then 
performed by chanting different mantras associated with the specific parts of 
the deities' body such as - Om Hram Hridayay Namah, Om Hrim Shirse Swaha, 
Om Hoom Shikhayai Vashat, Om Hraim Kavachay Hoom, Om Hraum Netra 
Trayay Vaushat, Om Hrah Astray Phat. 
Having accomplished the above mentioned rituals, a devotee should then 
worship each of the five faces of Shiva by chanting the following mantras - Om 
Hram Saddyojatay Namah Om Hrim Vamdevay Namah, Om Hoom Aghoray 
Namah, Om Hraim Tatpurushay Namah, Om Hraum Ishanay Namah. 
VISHNU MANTRA  
While worshipping Lord Vishnu, first of all a devotee should worship the 'Asan' 
of the deity by chanting-- Om Vasudeva Asanay Namah. 
He should then make salutations to Lord Vishnu by chanting the following 
mantras-- Om Vasudevay Murtaye Namah, Om Aim Om Namo Bhagavate 
Vasudevay Namah, Om Am Om Namo Bhagavate Sankarshanay Namah, Om 
Aim Om Namo Bhagavate Pradyumnay Namah, Om Ah Om Namo Bhagavate 
Aniruddhay Namah Subsequently, a devotee should worship the various 
incarnations of Lord Vishnu, his weapons as well as his different mounts by 

1128 
 



incorporating the rituals of 'Shodashopachar' and by chanting the following 
mantras-- Om Narayanay Namah, Om Tatsad Brahmane Namah, Om Hoom 
Vishnave Namah, Om Hraum Namo Bhagavate Nrisinhay Namah, Om Bhuh 
Om Namo Bhagavate Varahay Namah, etc. 
SARASWATI MANTRA  
A devotee should begin his worship by making salutations to Goddess Sarswati 
by chanting-- Om Hrim Sarswatyai Namah. 
He should then perform the rituals of 'Shadangnyas' by chanting the following 
mantras-- Om Hram Hridayay Namah, Om Hrim Shirse Swaha, Om Hoom 
Shikhayai Vashat, Om Hraim Kavachay Hoom, Om Hraum Netra Trayay 
Vaushat, Om Hrah Astray Phat. 
LAKSHMI MANTRA  
A devotee desirous of acquiring wealth and prosperity must worship Goddess 
Lakshmi with appropriate rituals. He should begin by making salutations to the 
Goddess by chanting the following mantra -- Om Srim Hrim Mahalakshmyai 
Namah. 
Then follows the rituals of 'Shadangnyas' that is performed by chanting the 
specific mantras meant for them. 
 
III. ASTROLOGY IN GARUDA PURANA  
THE CHARIOTS OF NAVGRAHAS  
While describing the chariots of all the nine planets, Lord Vishnu told Rudra--' 
The chariot of Surya deva (Sun) has an unbelievable expanse stretching up to 
nine thousand yojans. The axle of the chariot is one crore and fifty seven lakh 
yojans long and wheels are fixed at both its ends. 
The wheels have six circumferences symbolizing the six main seasons and five 
spokes symbolizing the five different units of time measurement in them. The 
chariot of Surya (Sun) is pulled by seven horses. These horses symbolize the 

1129 
 



seven 'chhands' (stanzas used in poetry)- gayatri, vrihati, ushnik, jagati, 
trishtup, anushtup and pankti. 
The chariot of chandrama (Moon) has three wheels in it. It is pulled by ten 
white horses. The color of Mangal's (Mars) chariot is golden and is pulled by 
horses of dark red color. Buddh's (Mercury) chariot is of brown color and is 
pulled by eight horses of the same color. The chariot of Brihaspati (Jupiter) is 
made of gold and is pulled by eight horses of yellowish complexion. 
Jupiter remains in each of the twelve zodiacs for a year. 
Shukra's (Venus) chariot is well escorted by his army. The chariot has a mast 
on it's top and is pulled by horses that are found on earth. 
Horses pulling the chariot of Shani(Saturn) are of varicolored. The chariot of 
Rahu is pulled by eight horses, which are of the color of smoke. The chariot of 
Ketu is pulled by eight horses, which are red in color. 
DESCRIPTION OF YOGAS AND MUHURTAS  
Giving elaborate description of inauspicious days on which one should not 
undertake travels or journeys, Lord Vishnu told Shiva--'Various Yoginis 
(Goddesses) dwell in different directions on specific days and one should 
never set out on journeys on those days. A yogini named Brahmani dwells in 
the East on Pratipada(first) and navami(ninth) of both the fortnights of each 
month and nobody should travel on both these dates towards east. 
Maheshwari dwells in the north on second and ninth of both the fortnights of 
each month and hence nobody should travel towards north on both these 
dates. Varahai dwells in the south on the fifth and thirteenth of both the 
fortnights of each month and hence it is unadvisable to travel towards south 
on the above mentioned dates. In the same manner, Indrani dwells in the 
west on sixth and fourteenth of both the fortnights of each month and 
therefore nobody should travel in this direction on both the above mentioned 
dates.' While giving names of some auspicious Nakshatras suitable for 
undertaking journeys, Lord Vishnu said--'Constellations like Ashvini, Anuradha, 
Revati, Mrigashira, Mool, Punarvasu, Pushya, Hast and Jyeshtha are auspicious 

1130 
 



for undertaking journeys.' Lord Vishnu, giving some specific combinations of 
days and tithis considered to be inauspicious said--'One should never travel on 
the following inauspicious days: Dwadashi falling on Sunday or Ekadashi falling 
on Monday or Navami falling on Wednesday or Ashtami falling on Thursday or 
Saptami falling on Friday and Shashthi falling on Saturday. 
Amrit Yoga -- It is the most auspicious yoga for commencing any work. The 
conjunction of a particular day and specific nakshatra constitute this yoga. 
Few examples of Amrit yoga are Mool nakshatra falling on Sunday, Shravan 
nakshatra on Monday, Uttara bhadrapad on Tuesday, Kritika on Wednesday, 
Punarvasu on Thursday, Purvafalguni on Friday and Swati nakshatra falling on 
Saturday. 
Visha Yoga -- It is considered to be an inauspicious yoga and unsuitable for 
commencing any important work. Few examples of this particular yoga are 
Bharni nakshatra falling on Friday, Chitra nakshatra on Monday, Uttarashadha 
on Tuesday, Dhanishtha on Wednesday, Shatabhisha on Thursday, Rohini on 
Friday, and Revati nakshatra falling on Saturday. 
GRAHA DASHA  
Describing the period for which a particular planet is supposed to have its 
influence on the native, Lord Vishnu told Shiva-- 'Surya's dasha continues for 
six years and brings turbulence, turmoil and agony to the concerned person. 
Moon's dasha continues for fifteen years and is considered very auspicious as 
it brings happiness and prosperity. Mangal's dasha is considered inauspicious 
and lasts for eight years. It brings sorrow and misfortune. Buddh's dasha is 
auspicious and lasts for seventeen years. It brings all kinds of favorable results 
and is extremely rewarding in every respect. Shani's dasha lasts for ten years 
and brings all kinds of inauspicious results to a man. Brihaspati's dasha 
continues for nineteen years and is extremely auspicious. 
Rahu's dasha continues for twelve years and is inauspicious. Shukra's dasha 
lasts for twenty years and is auspicious.' Note -- The period of years stated in 

1131 
 



the above mentioned Graha- dashas are at variance from those mentioned by 
Sage Parashar, which is in practice today. 
PREDICTIONS BASED ON PHYSICAL TRAITS 
Dwelling on length about the importance of physical traits and symptoms 
apparent in an individual, Lord Vishnu told Shiva-' If one sees the following 
physical traits in a man, he should immediately understand that he is seeing a 
prospective King : Hands and feet as soft as a lotus flower, pink nails and no 
space left between the fingers when kept straight. There is no sign of bulging 
veins on his hands and palms and they do not sweat excessively. On the 
contrary, a person having rough feet that appears pale, with prominent veins 
on them indicates that the concerned person would be poor and miserable.'  
PREDICTING AGE WITH THE HELP OF FOREHEAD LINE  
Lord Vishnu said--'Anybody having three parallel lines on his forehead lives 
happily for sixty years whereas two parallel lines indicates that he would live 
till the age of forty years. Only one line on the forehead indicates that he 
would have a short life but if the line stretches up to both the ears then he 
lives for a century. If two parallel lines on the forehead stretches up to both 
the ears then the concerned person lives for seventy years while a triple 
parallel lines reaching both the ears indicates that he would live till the age of 
sixty years. A forehead devoid of any line on it means that the concerned 
person would live for only forty years while a cobweb of intersecting lines on 
the forehead indicates that the concerned person is definite to die a 
premature death. A forehead with a trident or an axe mark on it indicates that 
the concerned person would be prosperous and live for a century. 
PREDICTING AGE BY PALMISTRY  
Lord Vishnu, continuing with his narration told Shiva that the age of a person 
could be predicted by the lines found on his palms-- 'If the life line reaches the 
base between index and middle fingers then the concerned person lives for a 
century. If the life line is long, clear and without intersections from other lines 
then the concerned person lives for a hundred years. 

1132 
 



PREDICTION BASED ON PHYSICAL TRAITS OF WOMEN  
Lord Vishnu said--'A woman having a round face, curly hair and lower portion 
of her navel slightly slanted towards right, is extremely fortunate not only for 
herself but also for her whole clan. Similarly, a woman with golden 
complexion and hands as beautiful and soft as red lotus flower is exceptionally 
chaste and faithful towards her husband. A woman having dry and unruly hair 
and also round eyes becomes a widow. 
A woman whose face is round like a full moon and which radiates like a rising 
sun and whose lips are juicy like a 'Bael' fruit (Wood apple), enjoys a happy 
and contented life. A woman having a cobweb of lines on her palms is sure to 
lead a torturous and painful life whereas a palm with few lines indicates that 
she would be poor. If the lines are pink, then they indicate happiness, 
prosperity and good health whereas blackish lines indicate that she would live 
a life of slavery. Any woman having either a 'Chakra', a hook or a ear ring mark 
on her hand indicates that she would beget worthy sons and rule like a queen. 
A woman having hair around her breasts as well as a protruding lower lip 
spells doom for her husband. Any woman having a festoon mark on her palms 
indicates that she would get married in a family superior to her in status. A 
woman having a round navel with brown hair around it leads a life of slavery 
despite being born in a royal family. A woman whose little toes as well as big 
toes of both the legs do not touch the ground while walking spells doom for 
her husband. In the same manner beautiful eyes indicate good fortune while 
soft and tender skin indicate a happy married life. 
VARIOUS NAMES OF 'SHALIGRAM'  
Describing how a Shaligram is named on the basis of number of Chakra 
present on it, Lord Vishnu said--'If there is only one Chakra on the Shaligram 
idol then it is called 'Sudarshan'. In the same way, Shaligram with two Chakras 
is known as 'Lakshmi Narayan' while that having three Chakras on it is called 
'Achyut'. Shaligram with four Chakra on it is known as 'Chaturbhuj', that with 
five Chakras 'Vasudev'. Similarly, Shaligram with six, seven, eight, ninth, tenth, 
eleven and twelve Chakras are called 'Pradyumana', 'Sankarshan', 

1133 
 



'Purushottam', 'Navavyuha', 'Dashatmak', 'Aniruddha' and Dwi-Dashatmak 
respectively. Shaligrams with more than twelve Chakras are called infinite. 
HOW JEWELS ORIGINATED  
Sutji, once narrated the following tale to the assembled sages which sheds 
light on the origin of jewels and other precious stones--'During ancient times 
there lived a mighty demon named Bala. 
Although he had defeated the deities and driven them out from the heaven, 
yet he had assured them that he would extend fullest cooperation and 
support in any yagya performed by deities in future. All the deities planned to 
perform a 'Yagya' in order to regain their lost kingdom. They made all the 
necessary preparations for the Yagya but were unable to find a person who 
could offer himself as a 'sacrificial being'- a ritual without which any yagya is 
incomplete.' 'Seeing no other option, the worried deities took refuge of 
'Balasur' and requested him to offer himself for sacrifice so that the yagya 
could be accomplished without any hitch. Balasur was bound by his promise 
so he agreed. This way, the deities were able to accomplish their yagya. 
But, a strange event coincided with the death of Balasur, which surprised even 
the deities. The virtuous deed of offering himself as a sacrificial being in the 
yagya ceremony had amazingly transformed Balasur's corpse into jewels. 
Deities tried to carry the 'Jewel-body' through the aerial route towards a safer 
place, but it was fragmented into countless pieces due to the impact of 
ferocious speed of the wind it had to negotiate. These pieces scattered all 
over the places- ocean, rivers, Mountains, Forests, etc. In course of time these 
places got transformed into countless mines of jewels and precious stones 
such as Vajra (diamond), Muktamani, Indraneel, Sphatik, Prawal, Pushparag 
and many more. 
 
IV. PROMINENT PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE  
Sutji, while giving the names of some prominent places of pilgrimage told the 
assembled sages-- 'The banks of Ganga are considered to be the holiest 

1134 
 



among all the places of pilgrimage. The holy Ganga, which originates from the 
Himalayas in the north, ultimately gets merged with the ocean in the east. 
During her entire course of flow, she passes through numerous holy places, 
which owe their holiness mainly to her. Although, any place situated on the 
banks of Ganga is considered holy, yet Prayag, Haridwar, Varanasi and Ganga 
sangam (The place where she meets the ocean) have special significance and 
there is no other place as holy as each of them. Prayag is believed to fulfil both 
the wishes, which a man aspires for- worldly enjoyments as well as salvation. 
Performing the rituals of pinda dan here not only helps the ancestors to 
liberate but also himself. 
Varanasi is the same place where Lord Shiva and Keshav have their respective 
abodes. Donating at Kurukshetra brings incomparable virtues and gives both 
worldly enjoyments as well as salvation. Kedar teerth is capable of liberating 
even a heinous sinner from all his sins. Few other places considered very holy 
are- Shwetdweepa, Naimisharanya, Pushkar, Ayodhya, Chitrakut, Gomti, 
Kanchipuri, Sri Shail, Kam- teerth, Amarkantak, Ujjain, Mathura, Govardhan, 
etc. All these places have great religious significance and each of them is 
capable of liberating a man from all his sins. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF GAYA TEERTH  
Once, while narrating how Gaya, a prominent place of pilgrimage in eastern 
part of India got its name, Lord Brahma told sage Vyasa--'During ancient times 
there lived a mighty demon named Gaya. He used to torment the deities, who 
ultimately went to seek the help of Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu successfully killed 
Gayasur after a fierce mace-duel. The place where Gaya died became famous 
by his name. There is a grand Vishnu temple situated at Gaya where there is a 
magnificent idol of Lord 'Gadhadhar' (Lord Vishnu holding a mace in his hand). 
Gaya is considered to be the most ideal place of pilgrimage for performing the 
shraddh rituals. It is believed that a person goes to hell if he dies in the 
following circumstances- if he dies without his consecrations being performed, 
or if a wild animal kills him, or if he meets an accidental death no matter what 

1135 
 



the reasons are. But, if 'Shraddh rituals' are performed at 'Gaya' then the soul 
of such a man gets rid of the tortures of the hell and goes to heaven. 
The importance of performing 'Shraddh rituals' over there can be gauged by 
the fact that a person becomes liberated from 'pitra rina' (debts towards one's 
father) once he touches the sacrosanct soil of 'Gaya'. The reason being that 
Lord Vishnu himself dwells there in the form of 'Pitra devata' and by having his 
divine glimpse a man is freed of all his three debts. The entire area stretching 
from the foothills of Vishnu mountain to 'Uttar Manas' is considered 
extremely holy and this is the same area where river Falgu flows. Offering 
'Pinda dan' to ancestors at this place helps them to attain salvation. While 
performing the rituals of 'Pinda dan' he should chant the following mantra-- 
'Esha Pindo Maya Dastratav Haste Janardanah; Parlokam Gate Moksham 
Kshaymu Patishthatam.' There are many other places as holy as the banks of 
Falgu and performance of 'Shraddh rituals' over there give undiminished 
virtues to the ancestors - Dharma-Prishtha, Brahmasar, Gayashirsha, Akshay-
Teerth, Dhenukaranya are few such places capable of liberating twenty 
generations of a man. The entire city of 'Gaya' is considered sacrosanct and 
performing the rituals of 'Shraddh' or offering Pinda dan to ancestors at any 
place within 'Gaya' helps the soul of the ancestors to attain to Brahmaloka. 
THE RITUALS OF PINDADAN  
Before setting out for Gaya to offer Pinda dan, a man should appropriately 
perform 'Shraddh rituals' in the village or town he lives. Each step taken 
towards Gaya acts as a stepping stone to the heaven for the ancestors. 
Getting one's head tonsured or observing fast is prohibited in some places of 
pilgrimage like Badrinath, Kurukshetra, Jagannathpuri and Gaya. There is no 
time restriction on the performance of Shraddh rituals at Gaya and they can 
be performed anytime. 
After reaching Gaya, a man should first of all invoke his ancestors while taking 
bath in the holy Falgu and offer pinda dan to them. He should then visit the 
temple of Lord Gadadhar (Vishnu) and worship the deity. The next day, he 
should once again perform the Shraddh rituals at Dharmaranya and 

1136 
 



Matangwapi, two sacrosanct places having great religious significance. On the 
third day, he should perform the rituals of 'Tarpan' on the banks of 
'Brahmasada teerth' and then go to 'Koop-teerth' and 'Yoop-teerth' to repeat 
the performance of Shraddh rituals. 
He should then feed the Brahmins at 'Goprachar teerth', an act considered to 
help ancestors attain salvation. On the fourth day he should take a holy dip in 
river Falgu and once again perform 'Shraddh rituals' at a place called 
'Gayashirsh'. There are many more holy places in the vicinity where he is 
required to perform Shraddh rituals'- Vyasa, Dehimukh, Panchagni, Surya- 
teerth, Som-teerth and Kartikeya-teerth are few of them. Finally, on the fifth 
day, he should take a holy dip in 'Gada-lolak' teerth and offer 'Pinda-dan' 
under the Banyan tree called 'Akshay vat'- an act believed to liberate all his 
predecessors as well as coming generations from the bondage of Earth. 
After that Brahmins are fed. Feeding one Brahmin at Gaya brings the same 
virtues what one would get by feeding one crore Brahmins elsewhere.'  
TALE OF KING VISHAL 
Lord Brahma then narrated a tale glorifying the significance of performing 
'Shraddh rituals' at Gaya-- 'O Vyasa!  
Once upon a time there lived a trader who was sonless. One day, while he was 
on his pilgrimage, he met a restless ghost, who requested him to perform the 
rituals of Pinda dan at Gaya so that not only he became liberated from the 
pains and tortures of being a spirit but also he (trader) went to heaven. The 
trader went to Gaya accompanied by his younger brother, as per the request 
of the Ghost and not only performed the rituals of 'Pinda-dan' for the ghost 
but also for his own ancestors. 
As a result not only the ghost but all his ancestors became liberated. On 
account of his virtuous deeds, the trader was blessed with a son. He enjoyed a 
long life full of joy and contentment. 
After his death he was reborn as Vishal, in the princely state of Vishala. After 
growing up he got married but even after a long time he did not beget a son 

1137 
 



and this made him very sad. One day he asked the royal priests about the 
reason he did not beget a son. All the priests advised him to offer Pinda dan at 
Gaya as they felt that by doing so the king would definitely get blessed with a 
son and they were not wrong, as Vishal indeed was blessed with a son after he 
had offered Pinda dan at Gaya.'One day while Vishal was having a walk in the 
royal garden he was amazed to see three entities descending down from the 
sky. After all three of them had landed on the ground, Vishal had a close look 
at them. One of them was fair while the second one's complexion was 
reddish. The third and the most ferocious among them was of dark 
complexion. For a moment Vishal was dumbstruck by this mysterious sight but 
it did not take him long to gather his composure. He asked them as to who 
they were and was stunned by the answers he got. 
Actually, these three entities were none other than the souls of his Father, 
Grand Father and Great Grand Father, all of whom had died long ago. They 
had come to thank Vishal, who by performing the rituals of Shraddh had 
helped them in getting liberated from all their sins. The entity appearing fair, 
who in fact was Vishal's father said-- 'Thank you for helping me attain to Indra 
loka. If it were not for you, I would have still been languishing in hell. The 
entity with reddish complexion is your Grand Father, who had committed 
grave sins while he was alive and as the consequences he went to the most 
ferocious hell named Avichi after his death. Even he has been liberated 
because of you. The third entity among us and having dark complexion is your 
Great Grand Father. He had committed heinous of sins while he was alive but 
even he has become liberated because of you. We have come to express our 
gratitude and to thank you for having liberated us from our miserable 
conditions. All three of us are now departing for heaven.' Having said this all 
three of them disappeared in a moment. Vishal was extremely satisfied that 
he had been successful in fulfilling one of the major obligations towards his 
ancestors (pitra-rina) by helping them attain to heaven. He enjoyed a long life 
and after his death he too went to heaven. 
PRAJAPATI RUCHI'S DISENCHANTMENT  

1138 
 



Once, Sutji recounted the following tale to the assembled sages, which had 
been originally told by sage Markandeya to Kraunchki long ago-- ' 
Once, Sage Ruchi became so disenchanted with the world that he decided to 
remain a bachelor, a decision which made his 'Pitras'(ancestors) extremely 
worried. They tried to change his mind by citing numerous benefits of 
householder's life and the yeomen service he does to the society. 
They said-- 'O Ruchi! The decision you have taken is most unfortunate. 
Perhaps you are not aware of the importance a 'Grihasta' holds in the society. 
But for his cooperation, not a single religious activity can take place. It's your 
misconception that a 'Grihasta' can not attain salvation. 
On the contrary, he has numerous opportunities in his life to attain salvation. 
Different rituals and consecrations enable him to achieve this important goal 
of a man's life.' Pitras' advises had great impact on Prajapati Ruchi and he 
agreed to get married.' Thereafter a search for an ideal match began but even 
after best of his efforts he did not get any. 
Prajapati Ruchi then decided to please Lord Brahma by his austere penance. 
He commenced his penance, which continued for a very long period. Finally, 
Lord Brahma appeared and advised him to please his 'Pitras'. Acting on the 
advice of Lord Brahma, Prajapati Ruchi eulogized his ancestors and performed 
the rituals of 'Tarpan' to pacify their souls. All his 'Pitras' appeared and blessed 
him. PRAJAPATI RUCHI MARRIES MANINI The blessings given by 'Pitras' 
fructified instantaneously as a beautiful 'Apsara' manifested herself from the 
river flowing nearby and said--'O great sage! I am Pramlocha. I would consider 
it as my good fortune if you give your consent to marry my daughter- Manini. 
Pushkar- son of Varun is her father. In course of time a son named 'Rauchya' 
will be born to you.' This was the day Prajapati Ruchi was eagerly waiting for. 
He decided to get married then and there so he invited all the prominent 
sages and the marriage ceremony was solemnized in their presence. In course 
of time, a son named 'Rauchya' was born to them. He was a great sage after 
whom a Manvantar was named. 

1139 
 



 
V. DESCRIPTION OF VARIOUS CONSECRATIONS  
While describing the significance of various consecrations, Lord Vishnu told 
Shiva that the union of man's sperm and woman's ovum results into the birth 
of a child. This union along with the whole process of foetus getting 
transformed into a baby is a lengthy affair during which it imbibes numerous 
impurities. Consecrations purify a man from all these impurities. Lord Vishnu 
said --'The mankind has been categorized into four prominent castes- 
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. The former three castes are also 
known as 'Dwijas' (Twice born. The solemnization of a consecration named 
Yagyopavit is believed to be their second birth.) because only they are entitled 
to get consecrated into this particular ceremony. Right from his birth till he 
takes his last breath, a 'Dwija' has to undergo various consecrations.' Giving 
the names of some prominent consecration ceremonies that a Dwija has to go 
through, Lord Vishnu said--'Garbhadhan Sanskar is performed at the time of 
conception. The scriptures have clearly stated about the best time for a 
woman to conceive- twelve days after her menstruation has started, 
beginning from the fifth day as the first four days are not considered 
auspicious for this purpose. 'Punsavan sanskar' is performed in the third 
month after conception while 'Seemantonayan sanskar' is performed in the 
sixth or eighth month after conception. After the birth of a child the 
consecration named 'Jat karma' is performed while 'Nam karan sanskar' is 
performed on the eleventh day after his birth whereby the new born baby is 
given a name. 
'Nishkraman sanskar' is performed in the fourth month and 'Annaprashan 
sanskar' in the sixth month. The consecration named 'Chudamani sanskar' can 
be performed either in the first, third or fifth year of the child.'  
UPANAYAN SANSKAR  
Dwelling on length about the appropriate way of performing 'Upanayan 
sanskar' (Sacred thread ceremony) rituals, Lord Vishnu said--'A Brahmin child 

1140 
 



should get consecrated with the sacred thread in his eighth year while a 
Kshatriya child's consecration should be performed when he has attained the 
age of eleven. 'Upanayan sanskar' of a Vaishya child should be performed in 
his twelfth year.' A dwija, whose 'Upanayan sanskar' has been performed, 
must face southwards while relieving himself in the night whereas during 
daytime he should face northward. Subsequently, he should purify himself by 
properly washing his urinary organ with mud (soap) and water. He should also 
wash his hands and feet. The purification is believed to be incomplete until 
and unless the rituals of 'Achman' (ritualistic rinsing of the mouth) have been 
performed. Next morning, after having a bath, he should do 'Pranayama' and 
chant the sacred Gayatri mantra facing east. In the evening he should chant 
Gayatri mantra facing south. After this the ritual of 'Bhikshatan' is performed 
whereby he seeks alms and donates everything that he gets to his Guru as a 
mark of respect to him. 
This particular ritual is symbolic and emphasizes the absolute necessity of 
subduing one's ego before acquiring knowledge from his Guru. A celibate is 
supposed to wear nothing but a Deer skin and a waist band made of long 
reeds on his person with a sacred thread hanging across his shoulder and 
carry a stick in his hand. The celibate whose Upanayan sanskar has been 
performed should stay at his Guru's hermitage till he completes his education. 
It is also his duty to collect food grains from the neighbourhood to meet the 
food requirement of all the people living in the hermitage. A Brahmin celibate 
should chant 'Bhavati bhiksham dehi' while seeking alms whereas a Kshatriya 
celibate should chant the same mantra with a slight modification ' Bhiksham 
bhavati dehi'. Similarly, a Vaishya celibate should chant 'Bhiksham dehi 
bhavati' while seeking alms.'  
KESHANT SANSKAR  
After finishing his education the celibate should shave his beards and 
moustaches for the first time. Strict guidelines have been laid down for each 
caste with respect to this particular consecration. A Brahmin should get 
consecrated with this ritual in his sixteenth year while a Kshatriya should get it 

1141 
 



performed in his twenty-second year. Similarly, a Vaishya should get 
consecrated with this ritual in his twenty-fourth year. The above mentioned 
age limits are also the maximum before which respective castes are supposed 
to get consecrated with the sacred thread ceremony failing which he becomes 
a religious outcaste. 
GRIHASTA ASHRAM  
His education being complete now it is the time for him to enter the life of a 
householder. But, before leaving the hermitage he should pay 'Dakshina' as a 
mark of gratitude to his Guru for all the knowledge he has imparted to him. 
With the permission of his Guru, he should then marry a girl who is beautiful, 
younger to him and belonging to different 'Gotra'. Although the best option 
for him is to marry a woman belonging to his own caste, but he is allowed to 
marry outside his caste, provided the woman hails from a caste inferior to him 
but under no circumstances he should marry a woman belonging to superior 
caste. 
COPULATION PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN DAYS  
An ideal wife is one who obeys the commands of her husband without any 
inhibition. According to the scriptures the best time for a married couple to 
copulate is after the woman has had her menstruation, especially till sixteen 
days after her periods have commenced are considered best for this purpose. 
But, there are also certain days on which making sexual contacts is prohibited; 
the first four days after her periods have started, Ashtami, Chaturdashi, 
Amavasya and Purnima are few such days. If the above given rules are 
followed then a couple can beget worthy sons possessing good qualities. 
Considering the fact that a woman has sexual urge eight times more than a 
man, scriptures have also advised a man not to overlook the sexual urge of his 
wife and to satisfy her without bothering about the prohibited days. 
PURIFICATION OF DIFFERENT ARTICLES  
Describing the methods of purifying different articles, Lord Vishnu reflected 
on the instructions which sage Yagyavalkya had once given to other sages in 

1142 
 



this regard-'Substances like gold, silver, conch, vegetables, rope, leather 
articles, etc. become pure once they are washed with water. In the same way, 
utensils made of wood or animal's horn become pure after they have been 
chiseled. Utensils used in yagya become pure after they have been rubbed 
with mud and then washed with water. Washing woolen and silken clothes 
with tepid water or cow-urine make them pure. 
Land is purified if it is coated with cow-dung. Copper vessels, articles made of 
lead and Tin vessels become pure if cleaned with a solution of alkali, acid and 
then washed with water. Iron and bronze vessels become pure if cleaned with 
ash and water. The followings are believed to be pure- sun-light, fire, cow, 
horse, earth, air, dew-drops, food-grains up for sale in the market, etc. 
A man should perform Achaman in the following circumstances- after his bath, 
after drinking water, after sneezing, after waking up from sleep, after having 
food, after having a walk on dusty path, after changing clothes, etc. 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF SHRADDH RITUALS  
Describing the proper way of performing Shraddh rituals, sage Yagyavalkya 
told the assembled sages--'A performer of Shraddh rituals should invite able 
Brahmins and offer them seats of Kusha grass. First of all an invocation is 
made to 'Vishvedeva' by chanting a mantra in his praise, an action which is 
followed by scattering grains of barley in the vessels kept in front of the 
Deity's idol. Subsequently, some water and a small quantity of barley is taken 
in a small vessel, which is then handed over to the Brahmins along with other 
articles such as ghee lamp, garland, incense, etc. There are specific mantras 
for this particular ritual. After that he should offer seats of Kusha grass to all 
his ancestors one by one beginning from the left hand side and subsequently 
moving on to the right hand side. All the ancestors are then invoked with 
specific mantras. 
The scriptures allow the use of sesame seeds in place of barley if latter is 
unavailable due to some reason. These sesame seeds should be kept in a 
'Ardhya patra' and placed to the left side of each 'Pitras' (ancestors) in an 

1143 
 



inverted position. While performing 'havan' he should make offerings of 'ghee' 
and other articles in the 'havan kunda'. Finally, Brahmins are fed after which 
the performer of Shraddh rituals offers Pindadan in the name of his ancestors. 
After that he helps all the Brahmins perform 'Achaman' and gives donations to 
them. The idol of Vishvedeva is immersed in a nearby river or pond and the 
inverted pots are kept back in the normal position. 
Finally, all the Brahmins are seen off with respect. Shraddh rituals performed 
in the above mentioned way immensely satisfy the ancestors and help them 
attain to heaven. 
 
VI. 'KARMA' AND ITS CONSEQUENCE- KARMA VIPAK 
Continuing with his discourses, sage Yagvalkya told the assembled sages that 
an enlightened soul is aware of the fact that the mortal world being 
impermanent in nature has its beginning as well as its end. He is also aware 
that a man reaps the fruits of his evil deeds in the form of 'Adhidaivik' 
(heavenly wrath), 'Adhyatmik' (obstacles in spiritual development) and 
'Adhibhautik' (worldly problems like diseases, poverty, etc.) That is why he 
endeavours to follow the path of virtuosity so that he can attain salvation, the 
ultimate objective of man's life. 
Anybody engaged in sinful deeds is definite to go to hell whereas virtuous 
deeds help a man to attain to heaven. After tasting the fruits of his actions he 
once again has to take birth to realize the unfulfilled wishes of his previous 
birth. This cycle of transmigration is an endless process, leading to countless 
births and deaths of a man. He experiences unbearable pains in his mother's 
wombs lying in an inverted position for nine months. 
Once again he has to go through the same dreadful experiences of youth, old 
age, diseases and death. A sinner, after tasting the fruits of his actions in the 
heaven or hell, depending on his virtuous or sinful deeds takes rebirth on the 
basis of the gravity of sins committed. Killing a Brahmin is believed to be the 

1144 
 



most heinous of sin and the person who has committed such a sin after having 
suffered the tortures of hell takes rebirth as a donkey or a dog. 
In the same way a person who has stolen gold takes rebirth as lowly creatures 
such as worms or insects. A drunkard takes rebirth as a frog and a person 
developing illicit relationship with his teacher's wife takes rebirth as grass or 
hay. One who shows disrespect to his parents is reborn as a tortoise whereas 
anybody who wishes ill of his friends is reborn as a donkey. 
ATONING FOR SINS  
While describing various means by which a sinner can atone for his sins, sage 
Yagyavalkya said- ' A man is certain to meet downfall and degradation in the 
following three conditions- if he goes against the instructions given in the 
scriptures, indulges in prohibited activities and runs after sensual pleasures. 
Atoning for one's sin is the best means of getting liberated from his sin as well 
as guilt. A sinner who does not atone for his sin goes through unbearable 
tortures and pains in hells more horrible than in 'Maharaurav' (name of a hell). 
Very severe punishment has been recommended for a person, who has 
breached the modesty of a woman especially if she happens to be his friend's 
wife, teacher's wife, his own daughter or sister-in-law, etc. Scriptures are of 
the opinion that such a sinner should be killed without showing any mercy. If 
the woman is a willing partner in this ghastly crime then even she should be 
meted out the same punishment. 
A person who has killed a Brahmin should atone for his sin by seeking alms for 
twelve years carrying a skull as his begging bowl. He should sustain himself on 
whatever he receives as alms. 
Protecting a cow's life also helps a man from getting liberated from the sin of 
'Brahma-hatya'. A drunkard should atone for his sin by consuming any of the 
following- boiling liquor, ghee, cowmilk or cow-urine. A person accused of 
stealing gold can become liberated from his sin by donating gold equivalent to 
his own weight. A person who has killed a cow can become liberated from his 

1145 
 



sin by consuming 'Panchgavya' ( a mixture of cow-milk, cow-dung, cow-urine, 
ghee and curd) and leading the rest of his life in the servitude of cows. 
 
VII. DIFFERENT KIND OF AUSTERITIES  
Describing the various types of austerities, Lord Vishnu named a few of them-- 
Yama (Restraining Passion)- This particular austerity comprises of ten virtues- 
Celibacy, Forgiveness, Meditation, Truthfulness, Honesty, Non-violence, Not 
stealing, Gentleness and Self control. 
Niyama (Daily Routine)-  
This austerity stresses the importance of purity: both of the body as well as of 
the mind. It comprises of the following activities: bathing daily, 
contemplation, observing fast, performing oblations, self study, abstinence, 
penance, avoiding anger, being respectful towards teacher and purity. 
Mahasantapan Vrata-  
This particular austerity comprises of specific rituals related with the usage of 
'Panchagavya' (a mixture of cow milk, curd, ghee, cow urine and cow dung). 
On the first day of the austerity a devotee should have only milk, on the 
second day curd, on the third day 'ghee', on the fourth day 'gomutra' (cow 
urine), on the fifth day 'gomaya' (cow dung), on the sixth day he should live 
only on 'kushodak' (drinking water from a vessel in which 'kusha' grass have 
been kept) and on the last day of the austerity he should observe complete 
fast. 
Parna Krichchha Vrata-  
Separate solutions of 'Palash' (Butea frondosa), 'Gular' (Ficus glomerata), 
'Kamal' ( lotus) and 'Bael' tree (wood apple) are prepared after boiling the 
leaves of respective vegetation mentioned above. On the first day of the 
austerity a devotee should have only 'Palash' solution while on the second day 
he should have 'Gular' solution. On the third day he should have 'Kamal' 
solution while on the fourth day he should live only on 'Bael' solution. 

1146 
 



On the fifth day of the austerity he should live only on 'Kusha' grass solution 
and nothing else. 
This is the manner in which the austerity of 'Parnakrichchha vrata' is observed. 
Tapta Krichchha Vrata-  
A person observing this austerity should begin by having hot milk on the first 
day followed by tepid ghee and lukewarm water on the second and third day 
respectively. 
He should observe a complete fast on the fourth day. 
Pad Krichchha Vrata –  
This particular austerity lasts for four days. On the first day a devotee should 
observe 'Ekabhakta vrata' (having food only once a day in the noon). On the 
second day he should observe 'Nakta' vrata (having food only once a day in 
the night). On the third day he should break his fast by having whatever is 
available with him because anything that has been provided by others is 
strictly prohibited. He should observe a total fast on the fourth day. When a 
devotee observes these cycles of austerity for three times then it is called 
'Prajapatya krichchhra vrata'. 
Ati Krichchha Vrata –  
Rituals of this austerity is more or less similar to that of Prajapatya krichchhra 
vrata with a slight difference- here fast is broken with a handful of cooked 
food. 
When this particular ritual is observed for four days then it is called 
Atikrichchha vrata.Krichchha Atikrichha Vrata - Observing the rituals of 
Atikrichchha vrata for twenty-one days living only on milk and water is called 
Krichchhakrichha vrata. 
Parak Vrata-  
Observing complete fast for twelve continuous days is called Parak vrata. 
Chandrayan Vrata –  

1147 
 



It's an important austerity lasting for a month which commences on First day 
of the bright half of a month by observing fast for the whole day and breaking 
it in the night with one morsel of food. On the next day, i.e. 'dwitiya' one 
morsel of food is increased which means that instead of one morsel of food 
now two morsels are taken. This way one morsel of food is increased on each 
of the following days till the fourteenth day (chaturdashi) when the fast is 
broken by having fourteen morsels of food. A total fast is observed on 
'Amavasya' (dark moon). 
On the next day i.e. first day of the dark half of the month one morsel is 
decreased which means that the devotee should break his fast with thirteen 
morsels of food. This way one morsel is decreased on each successive day till 
'chaturdashi' when a devotee breaks his fast by having only one morsel of 
food. This is the way, how a Chandrayan vrata should be observed. 
Anang Trayodashi Vrata –  
This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Shiva and commences on the 
thirteenth day of the bright half of the Hindu month Margashirsh and lasts for 
a year. It concludes exactly after a year when 'Rati' and 'Anang' are 
worshipped with appropriate rituals. Ten thousand offerings are made in the 
sacrificial fire. Brahmins are fed and donations made to them. One who 
observes this austerity is blessed with health, wealth and good fortune. 
Akhand Dwadashi Vrata –  
This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Vishnu. It commences on the 
twelfth day of the bright half of the Hindu month Margashirsh and lasts for a 
year consisting of three phases. One important characteristic of this austerity 
is that after four months, which is the first phase of the austerity, five vessels 
filled with food-grains are donated to Brahmins. In the second phase of the 
austerity consisting of four months and commencing from the Hindu month 
Chaitra, pots filled with parched grams are donated to Brahmins. 
Similarly, in the third and final phase of the austerity pots filled with ghee are 
donated to Brahmins. 

1148 
 



Shiva Ratri Vrata-  
This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Shiva and a fast is observed 
on the fourteenth day of the dark half of the Hindu month Falgun. A devotee 
should observe fast in the night and worship Lord Shiva by chanting 'Om 
Namah Shivay'. He should perform 'havan' with black sesame seeds and 
worship Lord Shiva at midnight, in the third and the fourth 'prahar' (one 
prahar equals three hour) with appropriate rituals. One who observes fast on 
this day gets all his wishes fulfilled and attains salvation as well. A devotee 
who observes Shiva Ratri fast for twelve successive years acquires knowledge, 
wealth, success and happiness. Such a man also attains to Shiva loka after his 
death. 
VIRTUES OF OBSERVING FAST ON SHIVA RATRI NIGHT  
During ancient times there lived a hunter named Sundarsen in the province of 
Arbuda. One day, he went deep into the forest in search of his prey but 
unfortunately he found none. He wandered all over the place but in vain. 
When evening came, he climbed up a wood apple (Bael) tree to protect 
himself from the wild animals. Sundarsen was worried that his family would 
have nothing to eat that night. Engrossed in his contemplative mood, he kept 
on plucking leaves from the 'Bael' tree and throwing them down. There was a 
Shivalinga just under the tree and the leaves, which Sundarsen threw, fell 
down on it. 
Next morning while Sundarsen was climbing down the tree, his arrow fell 
down. While picking up his arrow, he touched the Shivalinga. Sundarsen was 
unaware of the fact that it was Shivaratri night and he had worshiped Lord 
Shiva with appropriate rituals albeit inadvertently-he had offered Bilva patra 
to Lord Shiva and had touched the Shivalinga. He attained to Shiva loka on 
account of the virtues attained by his inadvertent worship of Lord Shiva. 
THE POWER OF CHASTITY  
Once, sage Vyasa went to Brahmaloka to get his doubts cleared on certain 
spiritual matters from Lord Brahma. While dwelling on a wide range of 

1149 
 



religious topics such as importance of austerities and various incarnations 
Lord Vishnu took to protect righteousness, Lord Brahma narrated a tale of a 
Brahmin woman who possessed divine powers on account of her chastity. 
Lord Brahma said--'During ancient times there lived a Brahmin named Kaushik 
in Pratishthanpur Nagar. He was inflicted with leprosy but still his wife was 
very chaste and faithful towards him. His wife used to be on her toes 
attending to all his demands and looking after all his requirements. But still, 
he used to scold and abuse his wife at the first given opportunity without any 
rhyme or reason. However, his wife did not mind his behaviour understanding 
quite well the frustrations of a man suffering from dreaded disease like 
leprosy.' One day, something happened which made Kaushik extremely angry 
and in a fit of rage he made an impossible demand thinking that his wife 
would never comply by it giving him an opportunity to curse her to the 
satisfaction of his heart. Shouting angrily at his wife, Kaushik said- Age has 
started showing effect on you. You don't look beautiful as before. You have 
also started neglecting me. Take me to a beautiful prostitute so that I can 
satisfy my sexual urge. 
Kaushik's wife was deeply hurt by his rude and unfair remarks but she 
remained cool and calm. 
Being a chaste and faithful wife she had no option but to obey her husband's 
command. So, she left for a prostitute's house carrying Kaushik on her 
shoulders. 
The prostitute's house was far and it became dark while they were still on the 
way. Because of darkness, Kaushik's wife could not see sage Mandavya, who 
in spite of his innocence was given a severe punishment by the king- he had 
been made to sit on a pointed cone which after having penetrated through his 
body had pierced even his skull. But, being a great sage, Mandavya was 
engrossed in his meditation even in such a painful physical condition. 
Unfortunately, Kaushik's feet, which were hanging down the shoulders of his 
wife, touched Mandavya's body. Mandavya's meditation was disturbed and he 
came out from his meditative level. As a result he became conscious of his 

1150 
 



unbearable physical pain and cursed that whoever had disturbed his 
meditation would not live to see the next day.'Kaushik died the next day but 
his wife, who had full confidence in her power of chastity, knew that her 
husband would be alive once again. She cursed angrily -- 'Mandavya has a 
misconception about his power. He thinks that only he can control the natural 
phenomena but perhaps he does not know what feats a chaste woman is 
capable of performing. Its my command to the Sun not to rise from tomorrow 
onwards.' And indeed, the Sun stopped rising from the next morning leading 
to catastrophic fallout. 
Everything went haywire in the world, which made the deities extremely 
worried. They came to me (Lord Brahma) with a request to reveal why Sun 
had stopped rising. I told them that it was all due to the curse of a chaste 
woman and then I narrated the whole story. I revealed to them that nobody 
except Sati Anusuya was capable of bringing back order in the world. I advised 
them to seek the help of Sati Anusuya who was famous for her exceptional 
chastity. So, all the deities went to Sati Anusuya and requested her to make 
the Sun rise so that everything became orderly in the world once again. Sati 
Anusuya agreed to lend her help in bringing back normalcy in the world. She, 
by the virtue of her chastity not only made the Sun rise daily but also made 
dead Kaushik alive once again. Such is the power commanded by a woman 
practicing the austerity of chastity. There are numerous examples of such 
women famous for their chastity and Sita was one of them. 
 
VIII. THE TALE OF RAMAYANA  
Lord Brahma then went on to describe the famous tale of Ramayana the mere 
listening to which absolves a man from all his sins. He began by giving the 
details of Sri Ram's lineage and said--'I (Lord Brahma) manifested from the 
Lotus originating from the navel of Lord Vishnu. Sage Marich manifested from 
me while Kashyap was Marich's son. Surya manifested from Kashyap, 
Vaivaswat-Manu from Surya and Ikshavaku was born to Vaivaswat-Manu. The 

1151 
 



great King Raghu was also the descendant of Ikshavaku. Raghu's son was Aja, 
whose son was Dasharath. 
Dasharath had three queens-Kaushalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra. Kaushalya gave 
birth to Sri Ram while Kaikeyi was the mother of Bharata. Sumitra had two 
sons-Lakshman and Shatrughan. 
Sri Ram had great devotion towards his parents. Sage Vishwamitra, who was 
tormented by the demons, took Sri Ram and Lakshman along with him so that 
he could do his penance peacefully. 
He assured Dashrath that he would make both his sons proficient in all the 
scriptures as well as in the usage of various weapons. With great reluctance, 
Dasharath allowed Sri Ram and Lakshman to go along with Vishwamitra. 
Once in the forest Sri Ram assured his Guru to do his penance without 
bothering about the demons. Vishwamitra commenced his penance and Sri 
Ram killed all the demons trying to disturb him. The names of few demons 
killed by Sri Ram were Tadaka, Subahu, etc. 
Janaka, the father of Sita had organized a grand 'Swayamvar' ceremony to 
which he had invited all the prominent kings of that time. He had also sent 
invitation to Vishwamitra. Vishwamitra set out for Janakapur accompanied by 
Sri Ram and Lakshman.Janaka had a huge bow gifted to him by Lord Shiva and 
which he worshipped daily with appropriate ritual.  
Once during the process of cleaning the area where Shiva's bow was kept, Sita 
lifted the bow and kept it a distance. Later on she forgot to keep it back at the 
original place. 
When Janaka came to worship the bow he was surprised to find it to be kept 
at a different place. 
He made an inquiry and Sita confessed that she had kept it while cleaning the 
place of worship. 
Janaka just could not believe that his tender looking daughter possessed such 
strength and power. 

1152 
 



No wonder he decided to give Sita's hand in marriage to such a man who 
could break Shiva's bow. So, he made a declaration that anybody capable of 
breaking Shiva's bow could have Sita as his wife. 
There were many mighty warriors present at the 'Swayamvar' ceremony but 
none had the strength to even lift the bow what to say about breaking it. 
Finally, as the destiny would have liked it, Sri Ram broke the bow into three 
pieces and thus married Sita. Lakshman married Urmila- another daughter of 
Dasharath while Bharata and Shatrughan married Mandavi and Keertimayi 
respectively, both daughters of King Kushadhwaja. 
Later on, when Dasharath decided to crown Sri Ram as the King of Ayodhya, 
Kaikeyi played a spoilsport and demanded her son-Bharata to be made the 
King of Ayodhya and Sri Ram to be sent into exile for fourteen years. Actually, 
Kaikeyi had taken undue advantage of Dasharath's helpless condition to serve 
her own interest.  
Once, Dasharath was busy fighting a battle oblivious of the fact that one of the 
wheels of the chariot was about to eject from its axle as the nail supporting it 
had fallen off. Kaikeyi, who was also accompanying him, saved his life by 
preventing the wheel from falling off and thus maintaining the balance of the 
chariot. When Dasharath learnt how Kaikeyi had saved his life he promised to 
grant her two boons. At that time Kaikeyi did not ask for any thing and merely 
said that she would demand at the appropriate time. 
So, when the time for Ram's coronation came she thought it was the best 
opportunity for her to remind Dasharath about the two boons he had 
promised to grant her. 
Dasharath, bound by his deep love for Sri Ram on the one hand and by his 
vow on the other, agreed to Kaikeyi's demand with a heavy heart. Sri Ram 
without any hesitation followed his father's order and left for the forest. How 
could have Sita and Lakshman lived without him? So, they too accompanied 
him to the forest. In course of his journey, Sri Ram passed by many holy places 

1153 
 



and finally after reaching Chitrakoot he made a 'Parna kuti' (hermitage made 
of leaves) and started living there. 
The shock caused by Sri Ram's separation proved to be fatal for Dasharath, 
who died with an unfulfilled desire of having a glimpse of his dearest son. 
Bharata, who at that time was at his maternal uncle's place, returned to 
Ayodhya after hearing the news of his father's demise and performed his last 
rites. He then went to Chitrakoot and tried his level best to convince Sri Ram 
into returning back to Ayodhya. But, Sri Ram did not agree, as it was against 
his principle to disobey the commands of his father. Sri Ram gave his pair of 
wooden sandals to Bharata as a token of love and requested him to return to 
Ayodhya. Bharata returned to Ayodhya and kept Sri Ram's sandals on the 
throne. He then stationed himself at Nandigram- a city situated at the 
outskirts of Ayodhya and started ruling from there on behalf of his elder 
brother. He had vowed not to return to Ayodhya till the completion of Sri 
Ram's period of exile. From Chitrakoot, Sri Ram reached Dandakaranya 
accompanied by Sita and Lakshman and started living in a hermitage made of 
leaves. There they also met prominent sages like Atri and Agastya.  
Once an ogress named 'Surpanakha' (Ravan's sister) attacked Sri Ram but 
Lakshman retaliated by severing both her ears as well as her nose. 
Surpanakha, badly injured and bleeding profusely, went to Khardushan and 
narrated her woeful tale. Khardushan attacked Sri Ram with a huge army 
consisting of fourteen thousand soldiers but lost all his men in the battle. 
The revengeful Ravan went to the hermitage disguised as a hermit and 
abducted Sita while Sri Ram was away in pursuit of Marich-the golden deer. 
Actually, Marich was a demon, who had disguised himself as a golden deer on 
the instruction of Ravan so that Sita could be abducted successfully. Ravan 
knew quite well that it was impossible for him to abduct Sita in the presence 
of Sri Ram. So, he hatched a plan according to which Marich was to disguise 
himself as a golden deer and enchant Sita. Ravan was sure that Sita after being 
enchanted by the beauty of the golden deer would ask her husband to get it 

1154 
 



at any cost. Everything happened as per the plan of Ravan and he was 
successful in abducting Sita. 
When Sri Ram did not find Sita in the hermitage he became worried and 
started searching for her frantically. On the way he met old Jatayu, who had 
got injured while trying to resist Ravan from taking away Sita. Jatayu informed 
him that Ravan had taken Sita towards south. Jatayu was so badly injured that 
he died soon after giving Sita's information to Sri Ram. Sri Ram performed his 
last rites and continued with his search. He proceeded towards south as per 
the instructions of Jatayu and reached 'Rishyamook' mountain where he met 
Sugriva, whom he befriended. He killed Bali, who harboured enemity against 
his brother- Sugriva. He then made Sugriva the King of 'Kishkindha' and 
himself went to live at 'Rishyamook' mountain. 
Sugriva sent monkeys in all directions to find out Sita's whereabouts. 
Hanuman went towards south and with the help of Sampati managed to find 
out the exact location where Ravan had kept Sita. Hanuman took a giant leap 
and the next moment he found himself on the other side of the ocean. He 
went to 'Ashok Vatika' where Ravan had kept Sita in captivity. He presented 
the ring to her, which Sri Ram had given him. Sita, in turn gave her 
'Chudamani' (ornament) and requested him to give it to Sri Ram. Jumping 
from one branch to another, hungry Hanuman ate all the fruits and in the 
process destroyed the beautiful garden. When Ravan came to know about the 
destruction caused in the beautiful garden of 'Ashok Vatika', he sent many 
demons to capture Hanuman. But, all of them were killed including Akshay 
Kumar, Ravan's son. Ultimately, Hanuman was made captive by Meghanad 
and produced before Ravan, who ordered his tail to be set ablaze as a 
punishment. Hanuman, with his tail ablaze, jumped from one palace to 
another and burnt the golden city of Lanka within no time. He then returned 
to his master Sri Ram and described everything in detail. 
Finally, Sri Ram attacked Lanka with a huge army comprising of mighty 
warriors like Hanuman, Sugriva, Angad and many others. A fierce battle took 
place in which all the demons including Ravan were killed. The victorious Sri 

1155 
 



Ram returned to Ayodhya along with his consort Sita. The residents of 
Ayodhya danced in joy at the return of their prodigious son. Sri Ram ruled 
over Ayodhya for eleven thousand years. Finally he ascended to the heaven 
taking along all the people of Ayodhya with him but before doing that he 
appointed Lav and Kush-his sons, as his successors.  
 
IX. SHRI KRISHNA  
Making a revelation to Vyasa that the Almighty God manifests himself 
whenever the civilization is endangered by the dominance of sinners, Lord 
Brahma said-- 'In Dwapar yuga, Lord Vishnu incarnated as Sri Krishna to 
protect Dharma from being subjugated by 'Adharma', which had become all 
pervasive at that time. He was born to Vasudev and Devaki. Both his parents 
had been kept under captivity by Kansa, who was aware of the prophesy that 
he would be killed by Devaki's eighth son. In due course of time Devaki gave 
birth to seven sons all of whom were mercilessly killed by Kansa one by one. In 
order to protect the life of Sri Krishna- the eighth child born to Devaki, 
Vasudev exchanged him with the baby girl born to Yashoda and Nand. 
Vasudev had no problem in moving out of the prison as Krishna by his divine 
power induced all the guards to sleep. 
Sri Krishna, being an incarnation of Lord Vishnu performed great feats right 
from his childhood. 
Once, Kansa sent an ogress named Putna, who tried to kill Sri Krishna by 
breast-feeding him. 
But, Krishna sucked her breasts with such ferocity that Putna met an instant 
death. In due course of time Sri Krishna killed many more ferocious demons 
like Shakatasur, Kaliya Nag, Dhenukasur and mesmerized the residents of 
Gokul by his divine bravery. He also performed many other divine feats like 
lifting Govardhan mountain and performing Ras-Lila with the Gopis. Seeing all 
his plans of killing Sri Krishna go in vain, Kansa sent him a message challenging 
for a duel- fought with his court-wrestlers named 'Mushtik' and 'Chanur'. Sri 

1156 
 



Krishna killed both the dreaded demons without much difficulty. Ultimately, 
Sri Krishna climbed up the throne sitting on which Ravan had been watching 
the wrestling bout and pulled him down by his hair. He then punched Kansa 
on his chest so hard that he died an instantaneous death. 
Having accomplished his most important mission of killing the demon king-
Kansa and liberating the earth from his tyranny, Sri Krishna went on to 
complete his education under the tutelage of Sage Sandipani. During ancient 
times it was customary for a disciple to offer Dakshina to his teacher, as a 
mark of respect after his education was complete. Sri Krishna following this 
tradition gave an invaluable Dakshina to his Guru by bringing all his dead sons 
alive to earth from 'Yamloka'. 
Sri Krishna was subsequently crowned as the king of Mathura but on account 
of the relentless attack by Jarasandha he had to abandon his dear city and 
shift his base to Dwarka. He had eight queens among whom Rukmini and 
Satyabhama were prominent. Later on he rescued sixteen thousand and one 
hundred women from the captivity of Narakasur and married all of them. 
From Rukmini he had a son named Pradyumna, who killed Shambarasur. 
Aniruddha was Pradyumna's son and he married Usha- daughter of Banasur. 
Banasur was a great devotee of Lord Shiva and was blessed with one thousand 
hands. 
Lord Shiva came to his rescue at the time when he was battling against the 
might of Sri Krishna. 
A fierce battle was fought between both the deities, which remained 
inconclusive even after a long time. Lord Shiva then requested Sri Krishna to 
spare Banasur's life to which he agreed albeit partially. Sri Krishna severed all 
the hands of Banasur barring two. Finally, after accomplishing his mission of 
liberating the earth from the darkness of sin Sri Krishna left for heavenly 
abode. 
 
 X. THE TALE OF MAHABHARATA  

1157 
 



Giving the reasons that lead to the great battle of Mahabharata, Lord Brahma 
told sage Vyasa that Sri Krishna had planned this great battle and executed it 
to perfection to relieve the earth from the burden of tyrants. While giving the 
names of lineal ascendants of Kauravas and Pandavas, he said--'I (Lord 
Brahma) manifested from the lotus which itself had its origin in the navel of 
Vishnu. Atri manifested from me while Chandra from Atri. Buddh was born to 
Chandra while he himself was the father of Pururava. Ayu was Pururava's son 
while he himself was the son of Yayati. 
The names of few famous descendants of Yayati were Bharata, Kuru and 
Shantanu. Shantanu had two wives- Ganga and Satyavati. The former was the 
mother of Bhishma, the indomitable warrior, who had vowed to remain a 
bachelor throughout his life. The latter i.e. Satyavati gave birth to two sons- 
Chitrangad and Vichitraveerya. A Gandharva killed Chitrangad while 
Vichitraveerya died issue-less despite having two wives- Ambika and Ambalika 
(both daughters of the king of Kashi). In order to expand their clan both 
Ambika and Ambalika begot one son each from sage Vyasa. Ambika gave birth 
to Dhritrashtra while Ambalika to Pandu. The same Vyasa also had a son from 
a maid servant who became famous as Vidur and who was famous for his 
statesmanship and tactfulness. 
Dhritrashtra married Gandhari and begot one hundred sons from her among 
whom Duryodhan was most notorious. These one hundred sons of 
Dhritrashtra became famous as Kauravas. Pandu had two wives Kunti and 
Madri from whom he begot five sons-Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjun, Nakul and 
Sahdev, who all grew up to be very powerful and mighty. All five of them 
became famous as Pandavas. Pandu, their father had died while they were 
still young and Madri, unable to bear the sorrow had given up her life by 
jumping into the burning pyre of her dead husband. 
So, the Pandavas were brought up under the guardianship of Kunti. 
Kauravas and Pandavas were bitter rivals right from their childhood. 
Duryodhan never missed a chance to torment the Pandavas- his cousins. Both 

1158 
 



Kauravas and Pandavas were brought up under the tutelage of Kripacharya 
and Dronacharya, both prominent scholars of their times. 
Once, Duryodhan tried to kill Bhima by poisoning him but fortunately Bhima 
not only came out unscathed but also with renewed strength and vigour. 
Duryodhan tried his luck for the second time to eliminate his enemies by 
setting ablaze the house of wax in which Pandavas were living but once again 
they came out unharmed. Pandavas then went to 'Ekchakra Nagar' and took 
refuge in the house of a Brahmin family. A demon named 'Baka' used to 
torment the people of Ekchakra Nagar. Bhima killed that demon and the 
people were relieved at the news of their tormentor's death. Thereafter 
Pandavas went to attend the Swayamvar ceremony of Draupadi. 
Arjun won Draupadi as his wife by piercing the eye of the fish hanged above 
his head by looking at its image in the water-pot kept below. 
At the insistence of Dronacharya and Bhishma, Yudhisthira reluctantly agreed 
to share half of his Kingdom with the Pandavas. Thus Pandavas started living 
at Indraprashth, the capital of their newly acquired Kingdom. Arjuna married 
Subhadra, his second wife and the sister of Sri Krishna. He pleased Agni Dev by 
his austere penance and received divine weapons like- a divine chariot, Gandiv 
(bow), imperishable arrows and an impenetrable shield. After being armed 
with these divine weapons he successfully defeated many powerful 
monarchies and gave the whole acquired wealth to Yudhisthira, his elder 
brother. 
Dhrithrashtra invited Yudhisthira for a game of 'Dyuta' (gamble) but 
Duryodhan defeated him by employing unfair and deceitful tactics with the 
active connivance of Shakuni- his cunning maternal uncle. Yudhisthira lost 
everything in the gamble- his whole wealth, his kingdom and even Draupadi. 
Pandavas had to go into exile for twelve years with an additional year of 
'Agyatwas' (they were not supposed to be recognized during this period) as 
per the terms and conditions laid down for the game. 

1159 
 



After completing their total period of exile, Pandavas reached Virat Nagar to 
spend their year of 'Agyatwas', which posed more dangers and challenges 
because if they were recognized during this period it would have meant 
another twelve years of exile for them. 
Having successfully completed their period of exile, Pandavas demanded back 
their Kingdom but Duryodhan was not even willing to part away with five 
villages. Thus Pandavas were left with no option but to fight for their 
legitimate rights. Both the rival armies boasted of mighty and brave warriors 
on their sides. 
Duryodhan appointed Bhishma as the chief commander of his army whereas 
Shikhandi was leading Pandava's army. The first ten days of the battle saw a 
fierce fight between both the rival armies during which period many warriors 
from each side achieved martyrdom. Finally, while Bhishma lay down injured, 
his whole body pierced with Arjuna's arrows, but still alive because he had 
received a boon of 'Iccha Mrityu' (death by his choice) prominent warriors 
from both sides stood around him. It was only after the Sun came north of 
equinox (Uttarayan), the auspicious time Bhishma had chosen to leave his 
mortal body that he died after preaching the Pandavas on wide range of 
subjects. 
After Bhishma's death Dronacharya led the Kaurava's army. This was the most 
crucial phase of the battle. Dronacharya had become so demoralized after his 
son's death, that he had just no motivation left in him to fight the battle. 
Finding an opportune moment, Dhrishtadyumna severed his head and 
Kauravas thus lost their most able and experienced commander. 
Duryodhan appointed Karna as the next commander of Kaurava's army. The 
most decisive phase of the battle began and after a fierce battle of two days 
Arjuna managed to kill his brave rival. 
Subsequently, Yudhisthira killed Shalya. 
After loosing all his mighty warriors, Duryodhana, in a fit of rage challenged 
Bhima for a duel of mace. Bhima killed him after a fierce fight. The revengeful 

1160 
 



Ashwatthama, son of Dronacharya, attacked the Pandava's camp at night, 
much against the norms of battle and killed all the five sons of Draupadi and 
thousand of other Pandava soldiers. Arjuna avenged the death of his sons by 
defeating Ashwatthama and extracting the diamond set in his forehead.After 
the battle ended, Yudhisthira performed the rituals of Shraddh in the name of 
all the dead warriors and ascended the throne. He ruled in a just manner just 
according to the instructions given by Bhishma. After Sri Krishna left this 
mortal world, Yudhisthira appointed Parikshit as his successor and left for 
Himalaya accompanied by his brothers as well as Draupadi. 
 
XI. THE ETERNAL TRUTH  
Lord Brahma, while shedding light on various aspects of religion told sage 
Vyasa that a man should look at his sorrows (shoka) with a sense of aloofness 
and detachment, considering it as a passing phase. He also revealed to Vyasa 
that the 'fire of sorrow' consumed everything that came into its fold and 
nothing remained untouched by it. A sorrowful man becomes bereft of all his 
possessions-knowledge, religion, physical strength, patience, happiness and all 
such qualities. 
Lord Brahma also told him that virtuous deeds never went without being 
rewarded, as all good things enjoyed by a man in his life are nothing but the 
result of his virtuous past 'Karmas'. On the contrary sinful deeds committed by 
a man makes his present as well as his future births miserable. Further, 
glorifying the virtues of some other good deeds, Lord Brahma said-' Protecting 
the life of a person, whose life is endangered and who has sought one's refuge 
is the greatest virtue and no other deed can be compared with it. One who 
sheds his life to protect his religion attains to heaven. 
A contented man enjoys even his adversities and remains unperturbed by 
them. A man should never miss a chance to get benefited by the company of 
enlightened souls because it gives him an opportunity to understand religion 
in a better way. Donating food begets incomparable virtues and no other 

1161 
 



virtuous deed stands anywhere near it.' Lord Brahma concluded by describing 
Sanatan Dharma in a nutshell and said-' Anybody observing the following 
austerities should be considered an ardent follower of 'Sanatan Dharma'- 
truth, penance, self-control, purity, forgiveness, compassion, knowledge and 
donation. 
THE SUPREME YOGA  
Once, Sage Shaunak asked Sutji about the reasons behind man's sorrow. Sutji 
told him that man's ego and his attachments to this mortal world were the 
two most important causes for his sorrow and until he gets rid of them he will 
continue to suffer. Sutji said-' The 'tree of ignorance' sprouts from the seed of 
'egotism' and it receives its nutrition from sensual pleasures. Only those who 
possess the 'axe of knowledge' are successful in felling this 'tree of ignorance' 
and experience the ecstasy of Divine bliss.  
Once a man has experienced this divine bliss he not only becomes free from 
all kinds of sorrow but is also freed from the cycles of birth, death and rebirth. 
This divine link which a man establishes with the Almighty is called 'Mahayoga' 
(the supreme Yoga). But, those unfortunate people who have not experienced 
this divine bliss continue to get trapped by the worldly illusions leading to 
their countless births and deaths.' Sutji then went on to describe the means 
by which a man can have a pure heart and said-' Austerities like meditation, 
worship, fasts, oblations, charity, etc., certainly helps a man in getting rid of all 
kinds of impurities.'  
DEVOTION-THE PATH LEADING TO ALMIGHTY  
Glorifying devotion as the simplest means to reach God, Sutji told Shaunak 
that there was nothing else that pleased God more than the unflinching 
devotion of his devotee in him. Sutji said-- 'A devotee who chants the holy 
name of God acquires imperishable virtues and attains salvation even if he 
were a lowly sinner. One who has surrendered himself to the will of God is 
absolved of all his sins. Even 'Yamaraj'- The Lord of death has strictly 
instructed his escorts to spare those who are devotees of Lord Vishnu. Lord 

1162 
 



Vishnu himself has declared that anybody having total devotion in him should 
be considered as the most virtuous soul even if he had committed the most 
heinous of sins.' Further hailing the glory of chanting Lord Vishnu's name Sutji 
said-' The mere chanting of Lord Vishnu's name in 'Kali yuga' brings the same 
virtue what the combined virtues of meditating on him during 'Satya yuga', 
chanting his sacred mantras during 'Treta yuga' and worshipping him during 
'Dwapar yuga' brought. A devotee who has nothing but the sacred name of 
Lord Vishnu on his lips is certain to attain to Vishnuloka after becoming free 
from the bondage of this world. 
Chanting the divine name of Vishnu even in dreams is believed to absolve a 
man of all his sins then what to say about people who consciously chant his 
holy name while they are awake.' Thus Sutji told Sage Shaunak that anybody 
could attain salvation by simply having total devotion in Lord Vishnu as it was 
the most simplest path leading to the Almighty. 
 
XII. THE DIVINE STROTRAS NRISINHA STOTRA  
Telling about the origin of this stotra, Sutji said--'Lord Shiva had created this 
stotra praising the glory of Lord Nrisinha and invoking him to protect the 
world from the wrath of Matrikas. The stotra goes as follows -- Namastestu 
Jagannath Narsinha Vapurdhar; Daiteshwar Endra Sanharinakha Bhukti Virajit. 
Nakh Mandal Sambhinna Hempingal Vigrah; Namostu Padmanabhay 
Shobahanay Jagadguro. 
Kalp Antambho Danighosh Suryakoti Samprabha; Sahastra Yam Santras 
Sahastrendra Parakram.Sahastra Dhandasfeet Sahastra Charanatmaka; 
Sahastra Chandra Pratim Sahastransu Harikram. 
Sahastra Rudra Tejaska Sahastra Brahma Sanstut; Sahastra Rudra Sanjat 
Sahastra Aksha Nirikshana. 
Sahastra Janma Mathana Sahastra Bandh Mochan; Sahastra Vayu Vegasa 
Sahastra Anga Kripakar. 

1163 
 



KULAMRIT STOTRA  
Sage Narada once asked Lord Shiva about the means by which a man could 
become free from the delusions of the world. Lord Shiva revealed to him the 
contents of 'Kulamrit stotra', eulogizing the majesty of Lord Vishnu. By 
chanting this stotra, Narada successfully attained to that supreme status, 
which even the most enlightened souls can only dream of. One who eulogizes 
Lord Vishnu by chanting this stotra, becomes liberated from all the bondage of 
the world. The stotra goes as follows -- Yastu Vishwamana Dyanta 
Majamatmani Sansthitam; Sarvagya Machalam Vishnum Sada Dhyayet Sa 
Muchyet. 
Devam Garbho Chitam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet; Ashariram 
Vidhataram Sarvagyan Manoratim. 
Achalam Sarvagam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet; Nirvikalpam 
Nirabhasam Nishprapancham Niramayam. 
Vasudevam Gurum Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet; Sarvatkam Cha Vai 
Yavadatma Chaitanya Rupakam. 
Shubham Ekaksharam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet; Vamyatitam 
Trikalagyam Vishvesham Loksakshinam. 
Sarva Smadyutam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet; Brahmadi Deva 
Gandharvai Munibhih Siddha Charanaih. 
Yogibhih Sevitam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet;Sansar Bandhanan Mukti 
Michhamleko Dhya Sheshatah. 
Stutvaivam Varadam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen Vimuchyet; Sansar Bandhanat 
Kopi Mukti Michchhan Samahitah. 
Anant Matyayam Devam Vishnum Vishva Pratishthitim; Vishveshwar Masaram 
Vishnum Sada Dhyayan Vimuchyet. 
MRITYU ASHTAK STOTRA  
Describing the origin of this stotra, Sutji said-- 'Lord Vishnu himself had taught 
this powerful stotra to Sage Markandeya. The daily chanting of this powerful 

1164 
 



mantra had enabled Markandeya to conquer death. One who daily chants this 
stotra thrice a day enjoys a long life and never dies a premature death. The 
stotra goes as follows -- Damodaram Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh Karishyati; 
Shankh Chakra Dharam Devam Vyakta Rupin Matyayam. 
Adhokshajam Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh Karishyati; Varaham Vamanam 
Vishnum Narsiham Janardanam. 
Madhavam Cha Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh Karishyati; Purusham Pushkar 
Kshetrabijam Punyam Jagatpatim. 
Loknatham Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh Karishyati; Sahastra Shirasam Devam 
Vyakta Tyaktam Sanatanam. 
Mahayogam Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh Karishyati; Bhutatmanam 
Mahatmanam Yagyayoni Mayojinam. 
Vishvarupam Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh Karishyati; Ityudi Ritmarkandyam 
Stotram Tasya Mahatmanah. 
Iti Tena Jito Mrityu Markande Yen Dhimta; Prasanne Pundarikakshe Nrisinhe 
Nasti Durlabham. 
 
XIII. SALVATION THROUGH YOGA  
Sutji told Sage Shaunak that the ultimate aim of a man's life was to attain 
salvation. A man can not attain salvation until and unless he has seen through 
the trappings of the worldly illusions. 
Sutji said--'Practice of Yoga helps a man to live in this world with a sense of 
detachment and to successfully avoid the allurements of this mortal world. 
Yoga comprises of six organs: Pranayamaa (Breathing exercises), Japa 
(chanting), Pratyahara (restraining sense organs), Dharana (resolution), 
Dhyana (meditation), and Samadhi (deep meditation). 
Not running after sensual pleasures by having self control helps a man in 
diminishing his sins and diminishment of sins pleases the deities who give 

1165 
 



blessings. Blessings of deities help a man to attain salvation. Pranayama, an 
important part of Yoga is of two types-'Garbha' and 'Agarbha'. 
Pranayama, done with simultaneous chanting of a mantra is called 'Garbha' 
whereas in 'Agarbha' Pranayama mantras are not chanted. 
It is natural for a man to get attracted by worldly pleasures and checking this 
tendency of the mind is called 'Pratyahara'. It is not easy to control the mind 
and concentrate on anything for a long time but 'Dharana' helps a man to do 
that. When a man has successfully controlled his sensual desires, then it 
becomes very easy for him to concentrate his mind. A concentrated mind 
finds it easy to meditate. When he has mastered meditation it is not much 
difficult for him to enter into the deep state of meditation i.e. 'Samadhi'. In 
the state of 'Samadhi', all sense of dualism cease to exist as one establishes 
divine link with the Almighty, which helps him in experiencing indescribable 
divine bliss. 
SELF REALIZATION  
Once, on being asked by Sage Narada about the means that helped a man in 
attaining self realization, Lord Vishnu told him that only those privileged few 
who have understood the impermanent nature of this world and have 
successfully controlled their sensual desires can attain self realization. All the 
mysteries of this Universe are unraveled to a man of self realization and he 
attains salvation. Lord Vishnu said-' It should be the prime objective of a man 
to make incessant efforts so that he can experience this divine knowledge of 
self realization-the real knowledge, for every other kind of knowledge is 
superficial and of least significance.' Lord Vishnu went on to describe how self 
realization could be attained-- 'Yadasarve Vimuchyante Kama Yeshya Hridi 
Sthitah; Tadamrit Twa Mapnopati Jivanneva Na Sanshayah. 
Meaning-- When there is no desire left in the heart then a man is certain to 
experience the divine taste of this nectar (self realization) in his life time-- and 
there is no doubt about it.Unraveling the mystery of Universe to Sage Narada, 
Lord Vishnu said--'Brahman is the cause behind this universe and one who has 

1166 
 



understood this fact can be rightly called a man of self realization. A man 
being under the influence of his sensual perceptions falsely believes this world 
to be real and is unable to understand the real cause behind the existence of 
this world, which is not the case with a man of self realization. Instead of 
searching 'without' a man should seek 'within' because within him exists the 
Universe just like our sense organs perceive them externally. The whole 
mystery of Universe is unraveled to a man who makes incessant efforts to 
undertake this inner journey for if his efforts are made with a pure heart and a 
firm determination then he is sure to reach his goal of self realization one day 
or the other. The soul (Atma) is Brahman but this fact becomes apparent only 
to those privileged few, who have attained self realization. Self realization 
illuminates the soul in the same way just as a lightning illuminates the dark sky 
at night.' Lord Vishnu went on to describe himself in the following words--'I 
am Pure and beyond the limits of human intelligence. I am beyond the 
confinement of three basic qualities (Satva guna, Rajas guna and Tamas guna). 
Only he can experience Me who possesses an enlightened soul because I 
manifest Myself in the heart of every individual as a divine effulgence in order 
to drive away the darkness which engulfs it.'  
BRAHMA-GITA  
Anybody who studies the sacred texts of 'Brahma-Gita' is certain to attain 
salvation for it brilliantly propounds the theory of divinity of man by 
proclaiming that in each individual dwells Brahman-the supreme Almighty. 
Eulogizing the glory of 'Brahma Gita' Lord Vishnu said-- 'Brahma-Gita declares 
that in each individual dwells Brahman and one who has understood this fact 
becomes free from the bondage of the world i.e. attains salvation. Nobody 
can deny the fact that God exists because the Almighty manifests himself all 
around us in various forms both perceptible and imperceptible. All the five 
elements (space, air, water, fire and earth) are nothing but the manifestations 
of Almighty God.' 'Unfortunately, most of the people are unaware of the 
presence of divinity in them- the existence of Brahman in each of them. The 
reason for this is not much difficult to comprehend because this fact is so 

1167 
 



subtle that only enlightened souls can experience it. HE lies dormant and 
cannot be experienced until and unless He is awakened by means of 
austerities and penance. Brahman is ever present in a man and does not 
abandon him in any of the three states of his consciousnesswhile he is awake, 
while he is dreaming or even while he is asleep. 
Despite being present in every individual he still remains unaffected by his 
deeds because by nature He is eternally pure. One more reason why man is 
unable to feel the presence of Brahman in himself is his own ego, with which 
he falsely develops deep association. So, a person who is desirous of realizing 
God must first subdue his ego so that Brahman manifests himself in all his 
glory. Without subduing his 'ego' a man can never realize God because the 
sense of dualism is the greatest impediment in the path of God realization and 
'egotism' only strengthen this sense of dualism.'' 
Once man has successfully subdued his ego, the dawning of God realization 
becomes imminent because Brahman now has no problem in manifesting 
himself in the changed scenario. Brahman who is absolute truth, eternally 
pure and the supreme Almighty. He is the eternal bliss dwelling in each 
individual- the realization which made the Vedas to proclaim 'Tatvam 
Asi'(Thou is me) and who is beyond the confinement of time and space.' 
Ultimately, Lord Vishnu revealed to Sage Narada that Brahman whose glory he 
had praised was none other than himself. 
 
XIV. GARUDA QUERIES  
Sutji once reached the forest of 'Naimisharanya' in course of his journey. 
Naimisharanya was a holy place where sages and hermits went to do penance. 
After reaching there Sutji met many prominent sages who were pleased at his 
arrival. They took it as a God sent opportunity to get their doubts cleared on 
the mystery called death and what exactly happened after a man died. 
Sage Shaunak, one of those sages, asked Sutji--'O Revered Sage! We were just 
awaiting your arrival. It seems God has listened to our prayer. We are 

1168 
 



confused by so many diverse and contradictory opinions expressed on the 
mystery of 'death' and what happens after death. Some people are of the 
belief that a man takes rebirth soon after his death whereas there are some 
who believe that a man after his death first goes to 'Yamloka' to taste the 
fruits of his 'Karmas' and only then he takes rebirth. We request you to clear 
our doubts and enlighten us on the mystery called death.' Sutji recounted the 
tale of Garuda, who had once posed the same query to Lord Krishna. While 
narrating the tale, Sutji said-- 'Garuda-son of Vinta, once decided to get a first 
hand experience of all the three 'Lokas' (worlds). After visiting all the three 
worlds he returned to 'Vaikuntha loka' and narrated his experiences to Lord 
Krishna. 
Garuda said-- 'After visiting all the three 'Lokas' I found the Earth (Prithvi) little 
overcrowded as compared to other 'Lokas'. I also found that it provided better 
opportunities to a man both for materialistic enjoyments as well as his 
spiritual advancement. So, I have come to the conclusion that 'Prithviloka' was 
the best of all the 'Lokas' in every respect. But, all round prevalence of sorrow 
and misery in 'Prithvi loka' made me sad. 
I was really perplexed to see people performing complex rituals after the 
death of their relative. 
All these rituals appeared so absurd to me. I was really amazed to see people 
laying down their dead relatives on the ground. I could also not understand 
why a dead body is laid on the bed of 'kusha' grass and sesame seeds. I 
witnessed so many rituals that surprised me, for instance I could not 
understand the reason why donations are made after a man dies. I am puzzled 
by the mystery called death or, what becomes of him after he dies. 
The sight of sons lifting the dead body of their father on their shoulders is still 
fresh in my memory. I could not understand the reason why 'ghee' (clarified 
butter) is applied on a dead body or why the relatives of the deceased chant 
'Yama sukta' facing north. I was also surprised to see the son of the deceased 
being debarred from having meal along with his other relatives. O Lord! Please 
reveal to me the significance of making 'pinda dan' or, the significance of 

1169 
 



'tarpan' rituals? Please tell me the proper method of offering 'pinda dan' and 
invoking ancestors? I find it hard to believe that all the deeds virtuous or evil 
committed by a man follows him after his death.' This way Garuda flooded 
Lord Krishna with a barrage of questions and sought clarifications on them. 
SALVATION THROUGH RITUALS  
Lord Krishna replied--"I am so delighted that you have asked such important 
questions for the benefit of mankind. I am revealing to you the secrets, which 
were hitherto unknown even to the deities and yogis. O Garuda! A man 
should try to beget a son with the help of means as mentioned in the 
scriptures because there is no salvation for a person bereft of son." Lord 
Krishna then went on to describe the proper rituals which are performed after 
the death of a man and said-"First of all, the area should be purified by coating 
it with a layer of cow-dung. 
This purified area is called 'mandal' and it is graced by the presence of the 
'Trinity'-- Brahma, Shiva and Myself. Sesame seeds are then sprinkled on the 
purified area and kusha grass is spread. A person whose death is imminent is 
then laid down on the bed of kusha grass. 
Scriptures say that a person who does not leave his mortal body in the above 
mentioned way, wanders hither and thither in the form of a restless spirit. No 
amount of rituals can put such a soul to rest. O Garuda! Sesame seed has 
manifested from my sweat and hence is extremely pure. 
All kind of evil forces like, ghosts, spirits, demons, etc. keep away from the 
place where it is used. 
Similarly, Kusha grass has manifested from my body hair and is graced by the 
presence of 'Trinity'-- Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu. Deities are satisfied if kusha 
grass is offered to them while ancestors are satisfied by the offerings of 
sesame seeds. Scriptures say that if dying man is laid down on the bed of 
kusha grass spread on the land purified by cow-dung, he becomes absolved of 
all his sins. There is a great significance of donating salt after the death of a 
person. Salt owes its origin to Me and donating it helps ancestors in attaining 

1170 
 



heaven. Donating salt also helps in reducing the pain and sufferings of a dying 
man and this is why it is donated along with other articles after a death of a 
person.  
The relatives of the deceased should chant the sacred 'Yama sukta' facing 
north because it helps him to attain liberation." Lord Krishna then explained 
to Garuda the appropriate way of carrying the corpse to the cremation 
ground--"The dead body should be carried to the cremation ground by the 
sons an other relatives of the deceased. In the cremation ground the dead 
body should be kept in such a way that it's head should be either towards east 
or north. The pyre should be made either of sandal or 'palash' wood."  
Describing the experiences of the soul when it leaves the body, Lord Krishna 
said--"The soul leaves the mortal body with great reluctance because the 
attachment with the mortal world exists even after his death. Yamdoots, 
descend down to earth to take the soul of the dying man to Yama loka. Those 
who have committed grave sins are tied with ropes and taken to Yama loka 
with great humiliation but virtuous souls are taken with honour and due 
respect. Yamraj- the Lord of death receives the virtuous soul with all the 
honour and respect and metes out punishment to those who had committed 
sins during their lives. In his dark complexion and with a buffalo as his mount 
and with a noose and iron stick in his hands, Yamraj appears terrifying.  
On the other hand, the sight of lifeless body appears disgusting and people try 
to dispose it off as quickly as possible because it is worthless without a soul. 
So, one must try to make the best use of this mortal body by indulging in good 
deeds before the day of his final journey arrives otherwise he would be left 
with nothing but regrets at the time of his death. 
DEATH AND AFTER  
Continuing with his narration, Lord Krishna said--"O Garuda! Death comes at 
the predetermined time, which remains fixed and unaltered under all 
circumstances. A man's sense organs become weak and his body feeble, which 

1171 
 



gets inflicted with numerous diseases in his old age. At the time of his death, 
man experiences unbearable pain and he begins to loose his consciousness. 
Yamdoots arrive and begin to retrieve the soul from the body and this 
aggravates the pain. 
Ultimately, the soul, which is not more than the size of a thumb, reluctantly 
comes out from the body as the attachment with the world exists even after 
his death. But, a virtuous person does not go through all these painful 
experiences at the time of his death. The soul has to take birth in different 
species as well as go through cycles of countless births, deaths and rebirths in 
order to taste the fruits of his Karmas. 
Describing the significance of 'Pinda dan' rituals, Lord Vishnu told Garuda that 
they are performed so that manes are satiated. He also revealed to him that 
six pinda dans are offered to the manes while performing the rituals of last 
rites-- "The first 'pinda-dan' is made at the place where person has breathed 
his last while the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth 'Pinda dans' are made at 
the main entrance of the house, the nearest cross-roads, the cremation 
ground, on the pyre itself and at the time of collecting last remains (Asthi) 
respectively. 
After reaching the cremation ground the dead body should be laid down with 
its head towards south. The mortal body then should be consigned to flames 
and after some time sesame seeds and ghee should be poured into the 
burning pyre so that it continues to burn without any problem. For the next 
ten days the relatives coming from the same gotra of the deceased should 
observe a period of 'Ashaucha'- a period during which he observes strict 
austerities and avoids social contacts. The son of the deceased is prohibited 
from having food along with his relatives simply because he is believed to be 
impure during this period." This way, being satisfied by Lord Krishna's 
answers, Garuda thanked him for clearing whatever doubts he had in his 
mind. Lord Krishna blessed him. 
Home   

1172 
 



15. MATSYA PURANA  
LOMAHARSHANA AND THE OTHER SAGES  
There was a forest known as Naimisharanya. Many years ago, several sages 
organized a yajna (sacrifice) in the forest. After the sacrifice was over, the 
assembled sages told Lomaharshana. ‘You have recited to us many Puranas. 
These accounts are so sacred that we would like to hear them once more. 
Please satisfy our thirst for knowledge.’ ‘I will recount for you the most holy of 
all the Puranas,’ replied Lomaharshana. ‘This is the great Matsya Purana, told 
by Vishnu to Manu. Prepare your minds, for I am about begin.’ VISHNU AND 
MANU There used to be a king named Vaivasvata Manu. He was the son of 
the sun-God Vivasvana. 
When it was time for Manu to retire to the forest, he handed over the 
kingdom to his son Ikshvaku. Manu then went to the foothills of Mount 
Malaya and started to perform tapasya (meditation). Thousands and 
thousands of years passed. Such were the powers of Manu‘s meditation that 
Brahma appeared before him. 
‘I am pleased with your prayers,’ said Brahma. ‘Ask for a boon.’ ‘I have only 
one boon to ask for,’ replied Manu. ‘Sooner or later there will be a destruction 
(pralaya) and the world will no longer exist. Please grant me the boon that it 
will be I who will save the world and its begins at the time of the destruction.’ 
Brahma readily granted this boon. 
Days passed. On one particular occasion, Manu was performing ablutions in a 
pond near his hermitage. He immersed his hands in the water so that he 
might offer some water to his ancestors. When he raised his cupped hands, he 
found that there was a minnow (shafari) swimming around in the water. 
Manu had no desire to kill the minnow. He placed it carefully in his water-pot 
(kamandalu). 
But the minnow started to grow and within a day, it was sixteen fingers in 
length. ‘Save me, king.’ said the fish. ‘This water-pot is too small for me.’ 
Manu then placed the fish in a vat. But the fish continued to grow and, within 

1173 
 



a day, it was three hands in length. ‘Save me, king.’ said the fish. ‘This vat is 
too small for me.’ Manu put the fish in a well, but the well soon became too 
small for the fish. Manu transferred the fish to a pond, but the pond was also 
too small for the fish. Manu now removed the fish to the holy river Ganga, but 
even this was too small for the fish. Finally, Manu transferred the fish to the 
ocean. There the fish grew so much that it soon occupied the entire ocean. 
‘Who are you?’ asked Manu. ‘I have never seen or heard of such wonders. Are 
you a demon that is deluding me with its illusions? No, I do not think that you 
are a demon. You must be the great Vishnu himself. Please tell me the truth 
and satisfy my curiosity.’ Vishnu then revealed that it was indeed he who had 
adopted the form of a fish. He told Manu that the earth would soon be 
flooded with water. Vishnu had got a boat built by the Gods. When the earth 
was flooded, Manu was to place all living beings in the boat and thus save 
them. Vishnu would himself arrive in his form of the fish and Manu was to tie 
the boat to the fish‘s horn. Thus the living beings would be saved. And when 
the waters of the flood receded, Manu could populate the world afresh and 
rule over it. 
Vishnu disappeared, and for a hundred years there was a terrible drought on 
earth. The drough led to famine and people died of starvation. Meanwhile, 
the sun blazed in fury and burnt up the entire world. When everything had 
burnt to ashes, dark clouds loomed in the sky. These are the clouds that 
appear at the time of destruction and there are seven classes of cush clouds, 
known as samvarta, bhimananda, drona, chanda, valahaka, vidyutapataka and 
kona. From the clouds, rain began to pour and soon, water engulfed the entire 
earth. The land mass was flooded. As instructed by Vishnu, Manu gathered 
together living beings inside the boat. And when the fish appeared, he tied the 
boat to the fish‘s horn. What do you think Manu used a rope? He used a 
gigantic snake. 
While the boat was thus thethered and dragged around by the fish, Manu 
asked Vishnu several questions. The answers that Vishnu provided form the 
text of the Matsya Purana. 

1174 
 



Let us start with the account of the creation. 
CREATION  
In the beginning, there was nothing in the universe. There was only darkness 
and the divine essence (brahman). It is impossible to describe the Brahman, it 
has no traits that can be described. 
When the time came for creation to start, the Brahman removed the darkness 
and divided itself into three. These three parts came to be known as Brahma, 
Vishnu and Shiva. The first object that was created was water and Vishnu slept 
on this water. Since nara means water and ayana means resting-place, Vishnu 
is accordingly also known as Narayana. 
In this water next appeared a golden (hiranya) egg (anda). The egg shone with 
the radiance of a thousand suns. Inside the egg, Brahma created himself. Since 
he effectively created (bhuva) himself (svayam), Brahma is also known as 
Svayambhuva. The egg, you will remember, was golden. Garbha means womb, 
and since Brahma was born inside a golden egg, he is also known as 
Hiranyagarbha. 
For a thousand years Brahma stayed inside the egg. He then split the shell into 
two and emerged out. Heaven (svarga) was made from one half of the shell 
and the earth from the remaining half. 
All the land masses, the oceans, the rivers and the mountains, had been inside 
the egg in embryonic form. Brahma made them manifest. 
The sun was also born. Since he was the first (adi) being to be born, he is 
known as Aditya. The word mrita means dead. Since the sun was born when 
the egg (anda) died, the sun was also known as Martanda. 
Brahma‘s first act was to meditate. It was while he was meditating that the 
Vedas, the Puranas and the other shastras (sacred texts) emerged from 
Brahma‘s mouth. Ten sons were also born to Brahma. Created from Brahma‘s 
mental powers, they all became sages. Their names were Marichi, Atri, Angira, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Pracheta, Vashishtha, Bhrigu and Narada. There were 

1175 
 



others too who were born. Daksha was born from Brahma‘s right toe. And the 
God Dharma was born from his chest. 
But for further creation to continue, it was essential that created beings 
should have proper mothers and fathers. Brahma accordingly created two 
beings from his body, one was male and the other was female. The male half 
was named Svayambhuva Manu and the female half was named Shatarupa. 
Shatarupa is also referred to as Savitri, Gayatri, Sarasvati or Brahmani. Since 
she had been born from Brahma‘s body, she was like Brahma‘s daughter. In 
fact, Vashishtha and the other sages who were Brahma‘s sons welcomed her 
as their sister. But Shatarupa was so beautiful that Brahma fell in love with her 
and wished to marry her. 
Shatarupa circled Brahma and showed her respects to him. When she stood in 
front of him. 
Brahma gazed upon her with the face that he had. But when she went and 
stood behind him, Brahma could see her no longer. Another head with 
another face therefore sprouted behind Brahma‘s first head so that he might 
be able to see Shatarupa. In similar fashion, a head sprouted to Brahma‘s first 
head so that he might be able to see Shatarpa. In similar fashion, a head 
sprouted to Brahma‘s right an another one to his left. And when Shatarupa 
rose above him, a head sprouted towards the top as well. Thus it was that 
Brahma came to have five heads and five faces. 
Brahma married Shatarupa and they lived together as man and wife for a 
hundred years. Their son was named Svayambhuva Manu. 
Hearing the account, Vaivasvata Manu exclaimed. ‘But what you have just said 
is truly amazing. 
How could Brahma have married his own daughter? Surely that is a sin.’ 
‘Perhaps,’ replied Vishnu, ‘but it is not for humans to judge the actions of the 
Gods. How could creation proceed if Brahma did not marry Shatarupa?‘ To 
continue with the account of the creation, Brahma created a sage named 

1176 
 



Sanatakumara and Shiva. Brahma asked Shiva to help him in the act of 
creation. ‘Why don‘t you create some beings as well?‘ asked Brahma. 
Shiva complied and started to create. But all the beings that he created were 
just like him in appearance. That is , they were all immortal. 
‘What are you doing?’ asked Brahma. ‘Don‘t create immortal beings. Create 
mortal ones instead.’ ‘That I refuse to do,’ retorted Shiva. ‘If I am to create, I 
shall create only immortals.’ ‘Please do not create thencrequested Brahma. ‘I 
will take care of creation myself.‖Svayambhuva Manu performed very difficult 
tapsaya and obtained a wife named Anati. 
Svayambhuva Manu and Ananti had two sons named Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada. 
From Uttanapada was descended Prachinavarhi. Prachinavarahi married 
Savarna, the daugther of the ocean, and they had ten sons. These sons were 
known as the Prachetas. The ten Prachetas married a woman named Marisha. 
That is, all of them had the same wife. Daksha was the son of the Prachetas 
and Marisha. 
DAKSHA’S DESCENDANTS  
Daksha married Panchanjani. Daksha and Panchajani had one thousand sons. 
These were known as the Haryakshas. Daksha asked his sons to create more 
living beings. 
But the sage Narada came and told the Haryakshas, ‘You can‘t possibly create 
living beings unless you know where they are going to live. Have you explored 
the universe that your creations are going to populate? Why don‘t you start 
out on a voyage of discovery?’ The Haryakshas did this and have never been 
heard of since. They did not return. 
Daksha and Panchajani now had another thousand sons. These were name 
the Shavalas. Narada asked the Shavalas also to explore the universe and they 
too disappeared. 

1177 
 



Sixty daughters were next born to Daksha and Panchajani. Ten of these 
daughers were married to the God Dharma, twenty-seven were married to 
the moon-God Chandra, and thirteen were married to the sage Kashyapa. The 
remaining daughters were married to various other sages. 
The thirteen daughters who were married to Kashyapa were named Aditi, Diti, 
Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasha, Ira, Kadru, Vishva 
and Muni. 
Aditi‘s sons were known as the adityas. There were twelve of them and they 
were named Indra, Dhata, Bhaga, Tvashta, Mitra, Varuna, Yama, Vivasvana, 
Savita, Pusha, Amshumana and Vishnu. These were the Gods. 
Diti‘s sons were the daityas (demons). There were two of them, named 
Hiranyakshipu and Hiranyaksha. Their sons also came to be known as the 
daityas. Hiranyaksha‘s sons were Uluka. 
Shakuni, Bhutasantapana and Mahanabha. Hiranyakshipu‘s sons were 
Prahlada, Anuhlada, Samhlada and Hlada. Prahlada‘s son was Virochana, 
Virochana‘s son was Vali, and Vali‘s son was Vanasura. 
Danu had a hundred sons. These and their descendants were known as the 
danavas (demons). 
Chief among the hundred sons was Viprachitti. Maya, the archietect of the 
demons, was descended from this line. 
Tamra had six daughters. These were the mothers of the birds and of goats, 
horse, sheep, camels and donkeys. Vinata had two sons, Aruna and Garuda. 
Aruna‘s sons were Sampati and Jatayu. 
Both Surasa and Kadru gave birth to snakes (nagas or sarpas). Krodhavasha 
was the mother of rakshasas (demons); Surabhi of cows and buffaloes; Muni 
of apsaras (dancers of heaven); Arishta of gandharvas (singers of heaven); Ira 
of trees and herbs; and Vishva of yakashas (demiGods). 
THE MARUTS  

1178 
 



Although the Gods and the demons were cousins, they did not like each other 
and fought amongst themselves all the time. Many daityas were killed by 
Vishnu and the other Gods. 
Diti was disconsolate to see her children suffer thus. She resolved that she 
would meditate so as to obtain a son who would be so powerful that he would 
kill Indra, the king of the Gods. There was a tirtha (place of pigrimage) named 
Syamantapanchaka on the banks of the sacred river Sarasvati. Diti went there 
and started to pray to the sage Kashyapa. She lived on roots and fruits and 
meditated for a hundred years. 
These prayers pleased Kashyapa. ‘Ask for a boon,’ he said. 
‘Please grant me a son who will kill Indra,’ replied Diti. 
‘It shall be as you wish,’ said Kashyapa. ‘But there are some conditions. You 
will have to live in this hermitage for a hundred years more. Throughout these 
hundred years you will bear the baby in your womb. But there are certain 
conditions of cleanliness that you must obeserved. You must not eat in the 
evening, nor must you sleep under a tree at night. Excercise is not permitted 
in any form. Do not sleep with your hair unbraided, or without having had a 
bath. If you can observe these rules for a hundred years, you will have the son 
you wish for.’ Kashyapa went away and Diti began to observe the rites that 
the sage had prescribed. But Indra had got to know what was afoot and he 
was naturally in no mood to permit the birth of a son who would be the cause 
of his own destruction. He hung around Diti‘s hermitage, pretending to serve 
his aunt. He brought her firewood and fruit and served her in other ways. But 
in reality, he was merely waiting for an opportunity. He was waiting for the 
moment when Diti would fail to observed the norms of cleaniness that had 
been laid down for her. 
Ninety-nine years and three hundred and sixty-two days passed. That is, only 
three days were left for the period of one hundred years to be over. Diti was 
tired on one particular occasion. Since the period of her ordeal was soon to 
end, she had also become somewhat careless. She fell asleep without washing 

1179 
 



her hair. What was worse, she went to sleep without having braided her hair. 
This was an act of gross uncleanliness. 
Indra seized his chance. Since Diti had committed an unclean act, her defences 
had been lowered. Indra entered Diti‘s womb in a trice. Indra has a wonderful 
weapon named vajra. With the vajra, Indra sliced the baby in Diti‘s womb into 
seven parts. These parts started to cry. ‘Ma ruda,’ said Indra. ‘Don‘t cry.’ But 
the parts continued to cry. Indra therefore chopped up each of the parts into 
seven more sections, so that there were forty-nine parts in all. Since Diti had 
failed to observe the prescribed rites, these forty-nine sections were no longer 
a threat to Indra. When they were born, they came to be known as the maruts 
from the words Indra had used in addressing them. They were elevated to the 
status of Gods and became Indra‘s friends and constant companions. 
THE MANVANTARAS  
Each manvantara is an era and is ruled over by a Manu. One of Brahma‘s days 
is known as a kalpa and there are fourteen manvantaras in every kalpa. At the 
end of every kalpa, the universe is destroyed and has to be created afresh. In 
the present kalpa, six manvantaras have already passed and the seventh 
manvantara is now current. There will be seven more manvantaras in the 
future before the universe and its inmates are destroyed. The Gods, the seven 
great sages (saptarshis) and the individual who holds the title of Indra, change 
from one manvantara to another. The fourteen eras of the present kalpa are 
as follows. 
(1) The first Manu was Svayambhuva. The Gods then were the yamas. 
(2) Svarochisha was the second Manu. The Gods were the tushitas and the 
names of the seven great sages were Dattoli, Chyavana, Stambha, Prana, 
Kashyapa, Ourva and Brihaspati. 
(3) The third Manu was Outtama. The Gods were named the bhavanas and 
Koukurundi, Dalbhya, Shankha, Pravahana, Shiva, Sita and Sasmita were the 
saptarshis. 

1180 
 



(4) Tamas was the fourth Manu. The seven great sages were Kavi, Prithu, Agni, 
Akapi, Kapi, Jalpa and Dhimana and the Gods were known as the sadhyas. 
(5) The fifth manvantara was ruled over by a Manu named Raivata. The Gods 
were the abhutarajas and the seven great sages were Devavahu, Suvahu, 
Parjanya, Somapa, Munti, Hiranyaroma and Saptashva. 
(6) Chakshusha was the sixth Manu. The Gods were known as the lekhas and 
the seven great sages were Bhrigu, Sudhama, Viraja, Sahishnu, Nada, 
Vivasvana, and Atinama. 
(7) The seventh manvantara is the one that is now current and the name of 
the Manu is Vaivasvata. The saptarshis are Atri, Vashishtha, Kashyapa, 
Goutama, Bharadvaja, Vishvamitra and Jamadagni. The Gods are the sadhyas, 
the vishvadevas, the maruts, the vasus, the two ashvinis and the adityas. 
(8) The eighth Manu will be Savarni and the seven great sages of this era will 
be Ashvatthama, Sharadvana, Koushika, Galava, Shatananda, Kashyapa and 
Rama. 
(9) The ninth Manu wil be Rouchya. 
(10) Bhoutya will be the tenth Manu. 
(11) The eleventh Manu will be named Merusavarni.(12) Rita will be the 
twelfth Manu. 
(13) Ritadhama will be the thirteenth Manu. 
(14) The fourteenth and final Manu will be named Vishvakasena. 
PRITHU 
A king named Anga was descended from Svayuambhuva Manu. Anga married 
Sunitha, the daughter of Mrityu, and they had a son named Vena. Mrityu was 
an evil person. From his childhood, Vena associated with this maternal 
grandfather of his and thus came to acquire evil ways. When Vena became 
king after Anga, he started to oppress the world. He stopped all yajnas and the 
prayers to the Gods. He insisted that people should pray only to Vena. The 

1181 
 



sages did their level best to persuade Vena to return to the righteous path, 
but Vena would not listen. 
The sages then killed Vena. Vena had no sons and a kingdom does not flourish 
in the absence of a king. Therefore, when Vena was dead, the sages started to 
knead the dead body so that a son might be born. The first being that 
emerged as a result of this kneading was a dark and dwarfish son. All the evil 
that was in Vena‘s body entered the body of this son so that there was no 
more evil left in the dead body. 
When the kneading continued, a handsome son was born from Vena‘s right 
hand. He was born fully grown and held bows, arrows and clubs in his hands 
when he emerged. His entire body was clad in shining armour. The word 
prithu means great. Since the son was born after a great deal of effort, he was 
given the name Prithu. 
The sages made arrangements for Prithu‘s coronation. Prithu was a good king 
who ruled well. 
But Prithu‘s subjects still did not have the wherewithal to make a living. They 
asked their king to do something about this. Prithu decided that since the 
earth was not providing any foodgrains, he would kill the earth. The earth 
adopted the form of a cow and started to flee. Wherever the earth went, the 
king followed in hot pursuit. 
The earth finally realized that she could not escape by running away. She told 
Prithu, ‘Please do not kill me. Then your subjects will not even have a place to 
live in. Your object is to find a means of living for your subjects. How will that 
be accomplished if you kill me? Milk me instead of killing me. The foodgrains 
that the milking will yield will provide the sustenance for your subjects.’ Prithu 
accordingly milked the earth. It is because of this that the earth is known as 
prithivi. Prithu also levelled out the earth with his bow so that his subjects 
could live in the plains thus created. 
The earth prospered during Prithu‘s rule. Poverty, disease and sins were 
unknown. Everyone was righteous. 

1182 
 



THE SOLAR LINE  
The sages requested Lomaharshana. ‘Please tell us the history of the solar 
line.‖Lomaharshana complied. 
Aditi and the sage Kashyapa had borne the sun-God, Vivasvana or Surya, as a 
son. Surya had three wives, Samjna, Rajni and Prabha. Rajna had a son named 
Revata and Prabha had a son named Prabhata (morning). Surya and Samjna 
had two sons and a daughter. The eldest son was Vaivasvata Manu. And the 
remaining two offspring were twins named Yama and Yamuna. 
The sun‘s radiance was however too much for Samjna to bear. After a while, 
she could not bear it any longer. She therefore created a woman out of her 
own body. The woman looked exactly like Samjna and was named Chhaya 
(shadow). There was no way of telling the two apart. 
‘Stay here and pretend to be me,’ said Samjna. ‘Look after my husband and 
my children. No one will know the truth unless you tell them. As for me, I am 
going away.’ Surya did not realize that Samjna had left. He took Chhaya to be 
his wife, and Surya and Chhaya had two sons and two daughters. The sons 
were Savarni Manu and Shani (Saturn) and the daughters were Tapati and 
Vishti. 
Chhaya was clearly fonder of her own children and neglected Samjna‘s. This 
did not bother Vaivasvata Manu too much. He was the eldest and more 
collected and balanced. But Yama resented this favouritism of Chhaya‘s. In a 
fit of petulance, he raised his foot to kick Chhaya. 
Chhaya cursed Yama. ‘I curse you that your foot may be devoured by worms,’ 
she said. ‘May it be infected with pus and blood.’ This alarmed Yama and he 
rushed to his father. ‘My mother has cursed me,’ he told Surya. ‘I am only a 
child. Even if I did commit a sin, does a mother ever curse her children? I have 
serious misgivings that she is not our mother at all.’ When Surya taxed Chhaya 
with this, she came out with the truth and Surya learnt that Samjna had left. 
Samjna‘s father was Vishvakarma, the architect of the Gods. Surya went to his 
father-inlaw to find out if he knew anything of Chhaya‘s whereabouts. 

1183 
 



‘Indeed, I do,’ replied Vishvakarma. ‘When Samjna left your house, she came 
to me in the form of a mare. But I refused to let her live in my house, since she 
had left her husband‘s house without seeking his permission. She is living at 
the moment in the desert. But Samjna did what she did because she could not 
bear to stand your energy and radiance. If you permit, I shall shave off some 
of the excess energy, so that people can look at you.’ Vishvakarma shaved off 
some of the sun‘s energy. With the excess energy were constructed many of 
the weapons of the Gods such as Vishnu‘s chakra (a bladed-discus), Shiva‘s 
trident (trishula) and Indra‘s vajra. This made the sun‘s visage much more 
pleasant and bearable. The only parts of Surya‘s body that were not thus 
modified were the feet. No one can bear to look at Surya‘s feet and it is 
forbidden to visualise the sun-God‘s feet when one is praying to him. A person 
who does not follow this injuction is a sinner and is made to suffer from 
leprosy.Surya now went to look for Samjna and found her in the form of a 
mare. He too adopted the form of a horse and joined her. As horses, they had 
two sons. Since ashva means horse, the sons were known as the Ashvinis. 
They became the physicians of the Gods and were also known as Nasatya and 
Dasra. After the Ashvinis were born, Surya and Samjna gave up their forms of 
horses and returned to their usual forms. 
What do you think happened to Savarni Manu? He went away to perform 
tapasya (meditation) on Mount Sumeru. He is destined to be one of the future 
Manus. Shani became a planet and Yamuna a river. As for Tapati, she too 
became a river (Tapai). 
Yama had been cursed by Chhaya that his feet would rot and be infected with 
worms. To mitigate the effects of the curse, Surya gave Yama a bird which ate 
up all the worms. Thereafter, Yama went to a tirtha named Gokarna and 
started to pray to Shiva. For thousands of years he prayed and eventually 
managed to please Shiva. Shiva granted Yama the boon that he would be the 
God of death. He would mete out punishments to sinners in accordance with 
the sins (papa) that they had committed. He would also keep account of the 
store of merit (punya) that righteous people accumulated. 

1184 
 



Vaivasvata Manu ruled as Manu. He had ten sons. The eldest was named Ila. 
The other sons were named Ikshvaku, Kushanabha, Arishta, Dhrishta, 
Narishyanata, Karusha, Sharyati, Prishadhra and Nabhaga. The solar line owes 
its origin to Ikshavaku. In this line was born king Bhagiratha, who brought the 
sacred river Ganga down from heaven. Further down the line was Dasharatha 
and Dasharatha‘s son was Rama. You know about Rama from the Ramayana. 
ILA AND THE LUNAR LINE  
Vaisvasvata Manu‘s eldest son was Ila. When Vaivasvata Manu became old, he 
retired to the forest. Ila was appointed the ruler in his place. Ila set out on a 
voyage of conquest and travelled throughout the world. There was a forest 
named Sharavana, frequented by Shiva and Parvati. 
Shiva had decreed that any man who entered the forest would become a 
woman. King Ila did not know about this rule and set foot in the forest 
inadvertently he immediaely got transformed into a woman. 
‘What is going to happen to me now?’ thought Ila. ‘Where will I live?’ He even 
forgot all about his earlier life. The moon-God, Chandra, had a son named 
Budha. While Ila was wandering around. Budha came upon her and fell in love 
with her. The two had a son named Pururava and Pururava was the ancestor 
of the lunar line. 
Meanwhile, Ikshvaku and the other brothers had started to look for Ila. When 
they could find no trace of their brother, they asked the sage Vashishtha if he 
knew of Ila‘s whereabouts. 
Vashishtha used his mental powers to find out what had happened. He asked 
the princes to pray to Shiva and Parvati. That was the only way to make Ila a 
man once more. 
The prayers pleased Shiva and Parvati and they found out what the princes 
wants. ‘But what you desire is quite impossible,’ they told Ikshvaku and his 
brother. ‘Ila can never be made a man once again. At best, we will grant you 
the following boon. Ila will alternate between being a man for one month and 
a woman for one month.’ The princes had to be content with this. As a 

1185 
 



woman, Ila continued to be known as Ila. But as a man, he came to known as 
Sudyumna and had three sons named Utkala, Gaya and Haritashva. 
DAKSHA AND SATI  
I will now tell you about Daksha and Sati,’ Lomaharshana told the sages. 
Daksha had a daughter named Sati who was married to Shiva. Daksha did not 
like his son-in-law at all. When he organized a yajna, he did not invite Shiva to 
attend the ceremony. But Sati went to the ceremony, although Shiva had not 
been invited. ‘Why did you not invite Shiva?’ Sati asked her father. 
‘Because your husband is undeserving of such honour,’ replied Daksha. ‘He is 
not fit to be treated on par with the other Gods.’ These words angered Sati. ‘I 
am ashamed that I am your daughter.’ She said. ‘Cursed am I that I have had 
to hear such abuses of the great Shiva. I no longer wish to be your daughter. I 
will therefore give up this physical body that I owe to you, by immolating 
myself. As for you, I curse you that you will be born on earth as the son of the 
ten Prachetas. You will then try to perform an ashvamdha yajna (horse 
sacrifice). But Shiva will destroy the ceremony.’ Daksha tried to pacify Sati. 
‘Please have mercy on me,’ he said. ‘You are the mother of the entire 
universe. How will the universe survive if you die? It is only through your good 
grace that you condescended to be born as my daughter. Please do not 
forsake me.’ ‘What I have said cannot be negated,’ replied Sati. ‘But I will 
grant you this much. When you are born on earth, you will continue to be 
devoted to me.’ ‘Where will I pray to you?’ asked Daksha. ‘At what tirthas? 
And what are the names by which I will address you in the course of my 
prayers?’ Sati then told Daksha one hundred and eight of her names. She also 
told him the names of one hundred and eight tirthas at which she was known 
by these respective names. These names and tirthas are as follows, witht he 
names being given first and the tirthas second. 
(1) Vishalakshi at Varanasi 
(2) Lingadharini at Naimisha. 
(3) Lalitadevi at Prayaga. 

1186 
 



(4) Kamakshi at Gandhamadana. 
(5) Kumuda at Manasa. 
(6) Vishvakaya at Ambara. 
(7) Gomati at Gomanta. 
(8) Kamacharini at Mandara. 
(9) Madotkata at Chaitraratha. 
(10) Jayanti at Hastinapura. 
(11) Gouri at Kanyakuvja. 
(12) Rambha at Malayachala. 
(13) Kirtimati at Ekamra. 
(14) Vishva at Vishveshvara. 
(15) Puruhuta at Pushkara. 
(16) Margadayini at Kedara. 
(17) Nanda at Himalaya. 
(18) Bhadrakarnika at Gokarna. 
(19) Bhavani at Sthaneshvara. 
(20) Vilvapatrikat at Vilva. 
(21) Madhavi at Shrishaila. 
(22) Bhadra at Bhadreshvara. 
(23) Jaya at Varahashaila. 
(24) Kamala at Kamalalalya. 
(25) Rudrani at Rudrakoti. 
(26) Kali at Kalanjara. 
(27) Kapila at Mahalinga. 
(28) Mukuteshvari at Markata. 

1187 
 



(29) Mahadevi at Shalagrama. 
(30) Janapriya at Shivalinga. 
(31) Kumari at Mayapuri. 
(32) Lalita at Santana. 
(33) Utpalakshi at Sahasraksha 
(34) Mahotpala at Kamalaksha. 
(35) Mangala at Gangatira. 
(36) Vimala at Purushottama. 
(37) Amoghakshi at Vipasha. 
(38) Patala at Pundravarddhana. 
(39) Narayani at Suparshva. 
(40) Bhadrasundari at Vikuta. 
(41) Vipula at Vipula. 
(42) Kalyani at Malalyachala. 
(43) Kotavi at Kotitirtha. 
(44) Sugandha at Madhavana. 
(45) Trisandhya at Godasharma. 
(46) Ratipriya at Gangadvara. 
(47) Shivananda at Shivakunda 
(48) Nandini at Devikatata. 
(49) Rukmini at Dvaravati. 
(50) Radha at Vrindavana. 
(51) Devaki at Mathura. 
(52) Parameshvari at Patala. 
(53) Sita at Chitrakuta. 

1188 
 



(54) Vindyavasini at Vindhya. 
(55) Ekavira at Sahyadri. 
(56) Chandrika at Harichandra. 
(57) Aroga at Vaidyanatha. 
(58) Maheshvari at Mahakala. 
(59) Abhaya at Ushnatirtha. 
(60) Amrita at Vindhyakandara. 
(61) Mandavi at Mandavya. 
(62) Svaha at Maheshvarapura. 
(63) Prachanda at Chhagalanda. 
(64) Chandrika at Makaranda. 
(65) Vararoha at Someshvara. 
(66) Pushkaravati at Prabhasa. 
(67) Devamata at Sarasvati. 
(68) Mata at Sagara. 
(69) Mahabhaga at Mahalaya. 
(70) Pingaleshvari at Payoshni. 
(71) Simhika at Kritashoucha. 
(72) Yashaskari at Kartikeya. 
(73) Lola at Utapalvarta. 
(74) Subhadra at Shonasangama. 
(75) Lakshimata at Siddhapura. 
(76) Angana at Bharatashrama. 
(77) Vishvamukhi at Jalandhara. 
(78) Tara at Kishkindhyachala. 

1189 
 



(79) Pushti at Devadaruvana. 
(80) Medha at Kashmiramandala. 
(81) Bhimadevi at Himachala. 
(82) Pushti at Vishveshvara. 
(83) Shuddhi at Kapalamochana. 
(84) Sita at Mayavarohana. 
(85) Dhvani at Shankhoddhara. 
(86) Dhriti at Pendara. 
(87) Kala at Chandrabhaga. 
(88) Shivakarini at Achchhodatira. 
(89) Amrita at Vena. 
(90) Urvashi at Vadrivina 
(91) Oushadhi at Uttarakur. 
(92) Kushodaka at Kushavdvipa 
(93) Manmatha at Hemakuta. 
(94) Satyavadini at Mukuta. 
(95) Vandaniy at Ashvattha. 
(96) Nidhi at Kuberalaya. 
(97) Gayatri at Vedavadana. 
(98) Parvati at Shivasannidhana. 
(99) Indrani at Devaloka. 
(100) Sarasvati at Brahmamukha. 
(101) Prabha at Suryabimba. 
(102) Vaishnavi at Matrigana. 
(103) Arundhati at Satismukha. 

1190 
 



(104) Tilottama. 
(105) Brahmakala. 
(106) Shakti. 
Having recited these names, Sati immolated herself. She was later reborn as 
Parvati or Uma, the daughter of Menaka and Himalaya. She was remarried to 
Shiva. As for Daksha, he was born on earth as the son of the ten Prachetas. 
BRAHMADATTA  
There used to be a sage named Koushika. Koushika had seven sons named 
Svasripa, Krodhana, Himsra, Pishuna, Kavi, Vagadushta and Pitrivarti. These 
sons all became disciples of the sage Garga. After Koushika died, there was a 
terrible drought on earth. Famine raged and people went hungry. Garga had 
asked his disciples to tend to his cattle and the seven brothers had taken the 
cattle to the forest so that they might browse on the grass that grew there. 
The brothers suffered so much from hunger that they decided to slay one of 
the cows and eat it. 
‘Killing a cow would be a sin,’ remarked the youngest. ‘If we have to kill the 
cow, let us at least perform its funeral ceremony. Perhaps that will reduce the 
severity of the sin that we are committing.’ The other brothers agreed to this. 
The funeral rites of the cow were observed. It was then killed and eaten. The 
brothers returned to Garga and told him. ‘A cow has been killed and eaten by 
a tiger.’ Garga saw no reason to disbelieve them. But the sin remained a sin. 
And as a consequence of having committed a crime, the brothers were born 
as hunters in their next lives. But they were born as jatismaras. That is, they 
remembered the incidents of their earlier lives. Since the brothers remembed 
what they had been in their earlier lives, they saw no reason to live as 
hunters. They therefore fasted until they died. They were next reborn as deer. 
But the deer continued to be jatismaras and fasted to death. The brothers 
were reborn as birds. Four of the brothers continued to be detached from 
material pursuits and spent their time in meditation. But the three remaining 
brothers were not so lucky. 

1191 
 



The king of Panchala had once come to the forest with his retinue. The king‘s 
name was Vibhraja. One of the birds was struck by the king‘s pomp and glory 
and wished to be born as a king in his next life. King Vibhraja and two 
ministers with him and all the soldiers seemed to be following the instructions 
of the ministers. Accordingly, two of the birds desired to be born as ministers 
in their next lives. 
The one who wished to be a king was born as Brahmadatta, King Vibhraja‘s 
son. The two who desired to be born as ministers became Pundarika and 
Suvalaka, the sons of the two ministers whom they had seen. The remaining 
three brothers were not attached to material pursuits and were born as 
Brahmanas (the first of the four classes). 
Brahmadatta married Kalyani. You will never guess who Kayanti had been in 
her earlier life. She had been the cow whom the brothers had killed. 
What was most remarkable was the fact that Brahmadatta could understand 
the languages of all living beings. Brahmadatta and Kalyani were once taking a 
walk in their garden. Brahmadata heard two ants conversing. Since he could 
understand the languages of all living beings, he could follow what the ants 
were saying. 
‘Why are you angry with me?‘ asked the male ant. ‘Why are you refusing to 
speak to me?’ ‘Go away and do not pester me,’ replied the female ant. ‘You 
say you love me very much. And yet, when you got some grains of sugar 
yesterday, you gave them to another ant and not to me. I refuse to speak to 
you.’ ‘That was my mistake,’ said the male ant. ‘I thought that it was you to 
whom I was giving the grains of sugar. I will never make such a mistake in the 
future. Please pardon me and smile. I cannot bear to see you so angry.’ The 
ants made up. 
The conversation made Brahmadatta laugh. Kalyani naturally wanted to know 
why Brahmadatta was laughing and the king reported the entire conversation 
to his wife. 

1192 
 



But Kalyani refused to believe her husband. ‘How can any man understand the 
language of ants?’ she wanted to know. ‘You are lying. You must have been 
laughing at me.’ Brahmadatta tried to convince his wife, but Kalyani would not 
listen. The king did not know what to do. But while he was sleeping, he 
dreamt that Vishnu appeared before him and told him to wait till the next 
morning. Brahmadatta‘s mind would be set at rest then. Four of the brothers 
had been born as Brahmanas. They had been born as the sons of a Brahmana 
named Sudaridra and were named Dhritimana, Tattvadarshi, Vidyachanda and 
Tapotsuka. Since they were born as jatismaras, they remembered their earlier 
lives and had no desire to tied down by material pursuits. They wanted to 
retire to the forest and meditate. 
But Sudaridra tried to restrain his sons. ‘How can you do that?’ he asked ‘How 
can you retire to the forest to meditate? Your duty is to look after me in my 
old age. If you do not look after, I shall starve to death. Please do not commit 
that sin.’ ‘You will not starve to death,’ replied his sons. ‘Go to King 
Brahmadatta and ask him for wealth. He will give you gold and villages. Tell 
him to remember the sage Garga, the hunters, the deer and the birds. The 
four sons went away to the foest. Sudarida came to meet the king. He met the 
king on the day following Brahmadatta‘s dream. Sudaridra‘s words reminded 
Brahmadatta of what he had been in his earlier lives. He was ashamed that he 
had forgotten those incidents and had become addicted to material pursuits. 
He decided to join his brothers in the forest. He gave Sudaridra as much 
wealth as the Brahmana wanted and handed over the kingdom to the prince, 
Vishvaksena. The brothers Pundarika and Suvalaka also accompanied 
Brahmadatta to the forest. It was thus that Koushika‘s seven sons eventually 
attained salvation. ‘There is one thing we do not understnad,’ said the sages. 
‘How came Brahmadatta to understand the languages of all living beings?’ 
‘That is easily explained.’ Replied Lomaharshana. ‘King Vibraja had prayed to 
Vishnu that he might obtain such a son and the boon was granted.’  
CHANDRA AND BUDHA  

1193 
 



You forgot to tell us how Budha was born,’ remarked the sages. ‘Nor did you 
tell us anything about Chandra‘s birth.’ Lomaharshana filled in the blanks. The 
sage Atri was Brahma‘s son. Atri once performed very difficult tapasya. A 
tremendous amount of energy was released as a result of this meditation and 
the moon-God, Chandra or Soma, was born from this energy. Brahma 
appointed Chandra ruler over all stars, planets and herbs (oshadhi). Twenty-
seven of Daksha‘s daughter were married to Chandra. These were the 
nakshatras (stars). Chandra performed a rajasuya yajna (royal sacrifice) and 
the ceremony was an outstanding success. Bt all this sucess. 
But all this success and glory went to Chandra‘s head. The preceptor of the 
Gods was the sage Brihaspati and Brihaspati‘s wife was Tara. Chandra‘s eyes 
fell upon Tara and he forcibly abducted her. On several occasions Brihaspati 
asked Chandra to return Tara, but the moon-God would not listen. A terrible 
war then raged between the Gods and demons over Tara. The Gods fought on 
Brihaspati‘s side and the demons aided Chandra. Shiva also fought on the side 
of the Gods. As the war raged, Shiva let fly a terrible divine weapon named 
Brahmashirsha at Chandra. 
Chandra countered this with another terrible divine weapon named somastra. 
These two weapons of destruction threatened to burn up the entire universe. 
Brahma decided that it was time for him to intervene. ‘Stop this nonsense at 
once,’ he told Chandra. ‘What you have done is most improper. Return Tara at 
once.’ These words ashamed Chandra and he returned Tara. But Chandra and 
Tara had already had a handsome son named Budha. Budha became very 
skilled in the handling of elephants. In fact, the knowledge of tackling and 
handling elephants goes back to Budha. You already know that Budha married 
Ila and that they had a son named Pururava. 
PURURAVA AND URVASHI 
Pururava was a very strong king who ruled the earth well. He performed one 
hundred ashvamedha yajnas. The three goals of human life are dharma 
(righteousness), artha (wealth), and kama (that which is desired). These three 
goals wished to see which of them Pururava revered the most. They therefore 

1194 
 



adopted human forms and came to visit Pururava. Pururava treated them with 
utmost respect and gave them golden seats to sit on. He offered them all sorts 
of offerings. But in the process, Dharma received more of the offerings than 
Artha and Kama. 
This angered Artha and Kama. ‘You will be destroyed,’ Artha cursed Pururava. 
‘You will go mad over Urvashi,’ Kama cursed Pururava but Dharma blessed 
Pururava. ‘You will live for long and you will never deviate from the righteous 
path,’ he said. ‘Your descendants will rule for ever.’ Having thus cursed and 
blessed Pururava, Dharma, Artha, and Kama disappeared. On one particular 
occasion, Pururava was driving his chariot through a forest. He suddenly found 
that a demon named Keshi was abducting an apsara (dancer of heaven). This 
apsara was none other than Urvashi. Pururava defeated the demon and 
rescued Urvashi. He restored her to Indra, the king of the Gods. Indra was 
deligthed at this act and Indra and Pururava became friends. The sage Bharata 
taught mankind how to sing and dance. To celebrate Urvashi‘s return, Indra 
asked Bharata to stage a performance. As artistes, Bharata chose three 
apsaras. They were Menaka, Urvashi and Rambha. Menaka and Rambha 
danced as they should. But Urvashi was attracted by King Pururava and kept 
looking at him. The result was that Urvashi fell out of step. This angered 
Bharata and he cursed Urvashi that she would have to spend fifty-five years 
on earth. On earth, Urvashi married Pururava and they had eight sons named 
Ayu, Dridayau, Ashvayu, Dhanayu, Dhritamana, Vasu, Shuchividya and 
Shatayu. 
YAYATI 
 In the lunar line there was a king named Nahusha and Nahusha‘s son was 
Yayati. Yayati had two wives, Sharmishtha and Devayani. Sharmishtha was the 
daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the danavas (demons). And Devayani‘s 
father was Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. 
Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha gave birth to 
Druhya, Anu and Puru. 

1195 
 



Yayati ruled the world extremely well for many years. He performed many 
yajnas. 
But eventually he grew old. The problem was that although Yayati grew old, 
he was not yet tired of sensual pleasures. He still desired to savour the joys 
that the world had to offer. Yayati told his five sons. ‘Because of 
Shukracharya‘s curse, an untimely old age has come upon me and I am not 
content with what I have savoured of life. I request one of you to give me his 
youth and accept my old age in return. When I have sated myself with worldly 
pleasures, I will take back my old age and return the youth.’ Except for Puru, 
the other four sons flatly refused such an exchange. They had no desire to 
part with their valued youth. They were thereupon cursed by their father. 
As for Puru, he said, ‘Please accept my youth and be happy. It is my duty to 
serve and I will gladly take upon me your old age.’ For a thousand years Yayati 
savoured the pleasures of the world with Puru‘s youth. A thousand years were 
not than enough to satisfy Yayati. He accepted his old age and returned Puru‘s 
youth. He blessed Puru for his obedience and announced to the word that 
Puru was his only true son. Puru inherited the kingdom after Yayati. His 
descendants were known as the Pauravas. It was in this line that King Bharata 
was born. It is after Bharata that the land we live in is known as 
Bharatavarsha. 
The sages interrupted Lomaharshana. ‘You are going too fast.’ They said. 
‘What is this curse of Shukracharya‘s that Yayati referred to? You have 
forgotten to tell us about that.’ ‘I will,’ replied Lomaharshana. ‘But first, let me 
tell you about Kacha and Devayani.‖ 
KACHA AND DEVAYANI  
The Gods and the demons fought with each other all the time. Brihaspati was 
the preceptor of the Gods and Shukracharya was the preceptor of the 
demons. Shukracharya knew a wonderful art known as mritasanjivani. This 
was the knowledge of bringing back dead people to life. 

1196 
 



Since Shukracharya knew this art, the Gods were in a terrible fix. Any demons 
whom the Gods killed were promptly brought back to life by Shukracharya. 
But Brihaspati knew no such art. So any Gods that the demons killed, stayed 
dead. The Gods pondered about this problem and finally arrived at a solution. 
Brihaspati had a son named Kacha. The Gods told Kacha. ‘Go and become 
Shukracharya‘s disciple. Try to learn the art of mritasanjivani from him. 
Shukracharya has a beautiful daughter named Devayani. Try to curry her 
favour so that your task may become easier.’ Kacha went to Shukracharya. 
‘Please accept me as your disciple,’ he said. ‘I am the great Brihaspati‘s son. I 
will serve you faithfully for a thousand years.’ Since no mention was made of 
mritasanjivani. Shukracharya gladly agreed to ths proposition. Kacha lived 
with Shukracharya and served his guru (teacher). He became friendly with 
Devayani and Devayani started to fall in love with Kacha. Five hundred years 
passed. The demons got to know that Kacha was Brihaspati‘s son. Since they 
hated Brihaspati, they hated Kacha as well. Kacha was in the habit of taking 
Shukracharya‘s cattle to the forest to graze. When Kacha was alone in the 
forest, the demons seized their chance. They slew Kacha and fed his body to 
the tigers. In the evening, the cattle returned home alone. Kacha was not with 
them. 
Seeing this, Devayani told her father, ‘The cattle have returned home without 
Kacha. I am certain that someone has killed him. I am in love with Kacha and 
cannot survive without him. 
Please do something.’ ‘Do not worry,’ Shukracharya told Devayani. ‘I will bring 
Kacha back to life with the art of mritasanijivani.’ As soon as Shukracharya 
recited the magical mantra (incantation), Kacha appeared before them, hale 
and hearty. Days passed. Kacha went to the forest once more, this time to 
pluckflowers. The demons killed him again. But this time they burnt the dead 
body and mixed the ashes in a goblet of wine. They then served the wine to 
Shukracharya to drink. When Kacha did not return, Devayani again told her 
father. ‘I am certain that someone has killed Kacha. I cannot survive without 
him. Please do something.’ Through this powers, Shukracharya discovered 

1197 
 



what had happened. He told his daughter, ‘We have a real problem on our 
hands. Kacha is inside my stomach. I can revive Kacha by summoning him 
through mritasanjivani. But in the process, he will have to tear asunder my 
body and I shall die. Tell me, beloved daughter, which do you want? Either 
Kacha or your fatehr will live.’ ‘I refuse the choice.’ replied Devayani. ‘Both 
you and Kacha must live. I cannot survivewithout either.’ Shukracharya then 
decided that there was only one way out. He addressed Kacha, who was inside 
his stomach, and taught him the words of the mrtasanjivani mantra. He then 
recited the words himself and out came Kacha. Shukracharya‘s body was torn 
apart and the sage died. 
But Kacha had learnt the words of the mantra. He now recited them to bring 
Shukracharya back to life. Kacha thus learnt what he had set out to achieve. 
After spending a thousand years with Shukracharya, he prepared to return to 
heaven. ‘Where are you going?’ asked Devayani. ‘Do you not know that I am 
in love with you? Please marry me.’ I am afraid that I cannot do that,’ replied 
Kacha. ‘You are my guru‘s daughter. Therefore, you are my superior just as my 
guru is my superior. I cannot marry you. Moreover, I have spent some time 
inside his body. And when I came out, it was as if a son had been born from 
him. You are therefore my sister. How can I possibly marry you?’ Thus 
spurned. Devayani became very angry. ‘You are playing with words,’ she said. 
‘I curse you that although you have learnt the art of mritasanjivani, it will 
prove to be of no use to you.’ ‘You have needlessly cursed me,’ retorted 
Kacha. ‘I too curse you that no Brahmana will ever marry you and that you will 
never get whatever it is that you wish for.’  
SHARMISHTHA AND DEVAYANI  
Sharmishtha was the daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the danavas. 
Sharmishtha and Devayani were great friends, until Indra played some 
mischief. The two friends had gone to bathe in a pond and had left their 
clothes on the bank. Indra adopted the form of a breeze and mixed up the 
clothes. When Sharmishtha donned her clothes after having had her bath, she 
put on Devayani‘s clothes by mistake. Devayani said, ‘How dare you wear my 

1198 
 



clothes? My father is your father‘s teacher and you are my inferior in every 
respect. You have no business to put on my clothes.’ ‘I am not your inferior.’ 
Replied Sharmishatha. ‘It is you who are my inferior. My father is the king and 
your father thrives on my father‘s generoisty.’ The two friends started to 
quarrel. Sharmishtha flung Devayani into a well and left her there, taking her 
to be dead. 
At that time, King Yayati came to the forest on a hunt. He was thirsty and 
looked for some water. 
When he found the well, he discovered Devayani inside it. He rescued 
Devayani. Yayati also fell in love with her, so that the two got married. 
Shukracharya got to know about all this and was furious at the treatment that 
Sharmishtha had meted out to his daughter. He threatened to leave the 
demons. Vrishaparva did his best to persuade Shukracharya not to leave 
them, but Shukracharya insisted that he would stay only if Devayani was 
pacified. Vrishaparva promised to give Devayani whatever it was that she 
wished for. ‘Sharmishtha has insulted me,’ said Devayani. ‘She has called me 
her inferior. My mind will be set at rest only if Sharmishtha serves as a 
servant. Vrishaparva agree to this conditon and Sharistha became Devayani‘s 
servant, together with one thousand other demon women. 
After Yayati and Devayani got married, Shukracharya told Yayati, ‘Sharmisha is 
Devayani‘s servant and you are married to Devayani. Under no circumstances 
marry Sharmishtha, otherwise I am going to curse. In due course, Devayani 
gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu. Sharmishtha had secretly married Yayati and 
she too gave birth to Druhya, Anu and Puru. ‘How came you to have sons? 
Asked Devayani. ‘Who is your husband? ‘My husband is a Brahmana,’ replied 
Sharmishtha. ‘I do not know his name.’ But when Devayani asked Druhya, Anu 
and Puru about their father, the truth came out. They told her that they were 
King Yayati‘s sons. ‘You have insulted me,’ Devayani told Yayati. ‘Will remain 
your wife no longer. You have married my servant.’ Shukracharya was also 
furious. Yayati had gone against his wishes and had married Sharmishtha. 
Shukracharya cursed Yayati that old age would set upon the king, although he 

1199 
 



was still in the prime of youth. ‘Please do not curse me,’ said Yayati. ‘I am 
married to your daughter. 
I wish to live with her as her husband. Do you wish your son-in-law to be an 
old servant?’ ‘My curse cannot be lifted,’ replied Shukracharya. ‘But I will try 
and mitigate the effects. I grant you the power that you can pass on this old 
age to whomsoever you wish.’ It was this old age that Puru accepted. 
MRITASANJIVANI  
But what about mritasanyjivani?’ asked the sages. ‘You haven‘t told us how 
Shukracharya came to acquire this wonderful knowledge.’ Lomaharshana told 
them the following story. The Gods and the demons fought all the time and 
the demons were sometimes worsted in these encounters. Shukracharya 
consoled the demons. ‘Do not worry,’ he said. ‘I will try and acquire powers 
that will make the demons invincible. I am going off to pray. While I am gone, 
do not fight with the Gods. Give up arms and lead the lives of hermits. Wait till 
my return.’ Shukracharya‘s father was the sage Brhrigu. The demons were 
instructed to wait in Bhrigu‘s hermitage for Shukracharya‘s return. The 
preceptor of the demons began to pray to Shiva. When Shiva appeared, 
Shukracharya told him that he wished to be taught a mantra that would make 
the demons invincible. ‘I will grant your request,’ said Shiva. ‘But you will have 
to observed a difficult vrata (religious rite). For a thousand years you will have 
to meditate. And you will have to live only on smoke.’ Shukracharya agreed to 
observe the vrata. 
Meanwhile, the Gods got to know what Shukracharya was up to. They realized 
that, once Shukracharya returned, they would be in no position to tackle the 
demons. The best thing to do was to attack the demons immediately, when 
they had given up arms and were living as hermits. 
The demons tried to tell the Gods that this was not fair. They should not be 
attacked when they had forsaken arms. But the Gods would not listen. They 
started to kill the demons. The demons fled to Shukracharya‘s mother, 
Bhrigu‘s wife, for protecion. ‘Do not despair,’ she assured the demons. ‘I will 

1200 
 



protect you.’ When the Gods attacked, the lady used her powers to make 
Indra completely immobile. Indra could not move at all. He stood there like a 
statue. This strange sight unverved the Gods so much that they started to run 
away. Vishnu came to help Indra. He told Indra to enter his body, so that 
Vishnu might be able to save him. ‘I will burn both of you up through my 
powers,’ said Shukracharya‘s mother. ‘What are you waiting for?’ Indra asked 
Vishnu. ‘Can‖t you see that this woman will destroy us both? Kill her at once.’ 
Vishnu summoned up his sudarshana chakra and with this, he neatly severed 
the lady‘s head. 
The sage Bhrigu was not present at that time. When he returned and found 
out what had happened, he was greatly angered. Vishnu had committed the 
crime of killing a woman. Bhrigu therefore cursed Vishnu that he would have 
to be born several times on earth. These are Vishnu‘s avataras (incarnations). 
As for his own wife, Bhrigu resurrected her through his powers. Indra had a 
daughter named Jayanti. Having failed in his attempt to kill the demons, Indra 
reasoned that he ought to try and disturb Shukracharya‘s meditation. He 
therefore sent Jayanti to the place where Shukracharya was praying. Her 
instructions were to try and distract the sage. Jayanti served Shukracharya 
faithfully throughout the appointed period of a thousand years. When the 
vrata was over, Shiva appeared before Shukracharva and taught him the art of 
mritasanjivani. 
It was then that Shukracharya noticed Jayanti. ‘Who are you?’ he asked. ‘And 
why have you been serving me thus? I am exceedingly pleased with what you 
have done. Tell me what I can do for you.’ ‘If you wish to grant me a boon, 
marry me and live as my husband for ten years,’ replied Jayanti. Shukracharya 
was lured away by Jayanti. Indra was bent upon ensuring the destruction of 
the demons and he now hit upon a plan. He asked Brihaspati to adopt 
Shukracharya‘s form and go to the demons. The demons were expecting their 
guru back after the thousand years were over and took Brihaspati to be 
Shukracharya. They honoured him and served him faithfully. When the ten 
years with Jayanti were over, Shukracharya returned and discovered 

1201 
 



Brihaspati among the demons. ‘Who is this upstart?‘ he demanded to know. 
‘Give him up and seek refuge with me. I am the real Shukracharya.’ ‘Not at all,’ 
replied Brihaspati. ‘I am the real Shukracharya.’ The demons were bemused. 
Brihaspati and Shukracharya were as alike as two peas in a pod; there was no 
way of telling the apart. They finally reasoned that the person who had been 
living with them for the last ten years must be their real guru. They therefore 
accepted Brihaspati and shooed Shukracharya away. 
Shukracharya cursed the demons that they were bound to be destroyed. As 
soon as Shukracharya cursed the demons, Brihaspati adopted his own form. 
The demons realized that they had been tricked, but the harm had been done. 
THE PURANAS  
Lomaharshana now gave the sages a list of the eighteen mahapuranas. In the 
beginning, there was only one Purana. The sage Vedavyasa divided this 
original Purana into eighteen mahapuranas. The mahapuranas have four lakh 
shlokas all together and their names are as follows. (i) The Brahma Purana: 
This was originally recited by Brahma to the sage Marichi and has thirteen 
thousand shlokas. This text should be donated on a full moon night (purnima) 
in the month of Vaishakha. Such a donation brings undying punya. (ii) The 
Padma Purana: This has fifty-five thousand shlokas and should be donated in 
the month of Jyaishtha. (iii) The Vishnu Purana: This was first recited by the 
sage Parashara and has twenty-three thousand shlokas. It is auspicious to 
donate this text in the month of Ashada. (iv) The Vayu Purana: This has 
twentyfour thousand shlokas and was first recited by the wind-God Vayu. It 
should be donated in the month of Shravana. (v) The Bhagavata Purana: This 
has eighteen thousand shlokas and should be donated in the month of 
Bhadra, on the night of the full moon. (vi) The Narada Purana: this was first 
recited by the sage Narada and has twenty-five thousand shokas. It should be 
donated on the night of the new moon (amavasya) in the month of Ashvina. 
(vii) The Markandeya Purana: This has nine thousand shlokas. A person 
desirous of obtaining punya should donate this text in month of Margashirsa. 
(viii) The Agni Purana: This was first recited by the fire-God Agni to the sage 

1202 
 



Vashishtha. It has sixteen thousand shlokas and should be donated in the 
month of Margashirsha. (ix) The Bhavishya Purana: Brahma himself was the 
first reciter of this Purana and it has fourteen thousand and five hundred 
shlokas. It is primarily concerned with what is due to happen in the future. The 
text should be donated on the occasion of purnima, in the month of Pousha. 
(x) The Brahmavaivarta Purana: This was first recited by Savarni Manu to the 
sage Narada. It has eighteen thousand shlokas and should be donated on 
purnima in the month of Magha. (xi) The Linga Purana: Brahma recited this 
first and it has eleven thousand sholkas. 
Punya is acquired if this text is donated in the month of Falguna. (xii) The 
Varaha Purana: The great Vishnu first recited this to the earth. It has twenty-
four thousand shlokas and is to be donated in the month of Chaitra. (xiii) The 
Skanda Purana: This was composed by the God Skanda or Kartikeya. It has 
eighty-one thousand shlokas and one desirous of punya donates the text in 
the month of Chaitra. (xiv) The Vamana Purana: Brahma was the first person 
to recite this. It has ten thousand shlokas and the text should be donated in 
early autumn (sharat). (xv) The Kurma Purana: Vishnu recited this in his form 
of a turtle. It has eighteen thousand shlokas and should be donated at the 
time of the equinoxes. (xvi) The Matsya Purana: Vishnu recited this in his form 
of a fish to Manu. It has fourteen thousand shlokas and should be donated at 
the time of the equinoxes. (xvii) The Garuda Purana: Krishna was the first 
person to recite this and it has eighteen thousand shlokas. (xviii) The 
Brahmanda Purana: Brahma recited this and it has twelve thousand and two 
hundred shlokas. But these Puranas, as stated, are merely for human 
consumption. Much longer versions are read by the Gods. The total number of 
shlokas in the Puranas that the Gods read is one hundred crores. 
TRIPURA  
There was a danava named Maya. Just as Vishvakarma was the architect of 
the Gods, Maya was the architect of the demons. When the demons were 
defeated by the Gods, Maya started to perfrom very difficult tapasya so that 
the Gods might be defeated. Maya‘s meditation inspired two other demons to 

1203 
 



also meditate. Their names were Vidyunmali and Taraka. The meditation was 
so difficult that the world marvelled at the sight of what the demons were 
doing. 
Finally, Brahma was pleased at all this effort and appeared before the 
demons. ‘ I am pleased with what you have done,’ said Brahma. ‘What boon 
do you want?’ ‘We have been defeated by the Gods,’ replied Maya. ‘We wish 
to build a fort that the Gods will not be able to destroy. The fort will be named 
Tripura and we will live in it and become immortal.’ ‘Immortality is a boon that 
cannot be granted.’ Said Brahma. ‘If you want, set fairly difficult conditions for 
your deaths.’ ‘Very well then,’ replied Maya. ‘We will be killed only if Shiva 
himself destroys Tripura with a single arrow. Let that be the appoined method 
of our deaths.’ This boon Brahma granted and Maya began the task of 
constructing the fort. 
In fact, he built three (tri) fortresses (pura). One was made of iron, the second 
of silver and the third of gold. Normally, the fortresses were distinct. But once 
every thousand years, when the nakshatra Pushya was in the sky, the three 
cities came together in the sky and were called Tripura. Each of the fortresses 
was stocked with diverse weapons as protections against raids by the Gods. 
Taraka lived in the fort made of iron, Vidyunmali in the one make o f silver, 
and Maya himself lived in the one that was made of gold. The other demons 
got to know that three invincible forts had been built. They came and 
populated the three cities. But the demons were not evil at all. They observed 
all sorts of religious rites. In particular, they were devoted to Shiva and prayed 
to him all the time. They did not want Shiva to be angry witht them. It was, 
after all, Shiva alone who could be the instrument for their destruction. But 
eventually, the demons became intoxicated with their own power and came 
upon evil ways. 
They warred upon other living beings and started to oppress the universe. 
Maya did try to persuade them to mend their ways, but the demons would 
not listen to Maya‘s good advice. All the living beings in the universe went to 
Brahma to complain. ‘Please save us from this oppression,’ They said, ‘It is 

1204 
 



because of your boon that the demons have become so powerful. ‘I cannot 
help you,’ replied Brahma. ‘The boon is such that Shiva alone can destroy 
Tripura. Let us all pray to Shiva.’ The Gods, the sages and the humans started 
to pray to Shiva. Pleased with these prayers, Shiva promised to destroy 
Tripura. 
A special chariot was built for Shiva to ride in. Brahma himself agreed to be 
the charioteer. The army of the Gods got ready to help Shiva in his war against 
Tripura. A terrible war raged between the Gods and the demons. Nandi is one 
of Shiva‘s companions. Nandi fought with Vidyunmali and slew the demon 
after a fierce battle. But Maya knew all sorts of magical tricks. He was 
particularly well-versed in the use of herbs. Maya gave Vidyunmali a bath in 
the juice of magical herbs and Vidyunmali immediately revived. This act 
greatly boosted the demons‘ morale and they began to fight with renewed 
vigour. Any demons,who were killed, were instantly revived by Maya. But 
when Shiva himself entered the fray, the demons were put to flight. Even the 
herbs that resurrected dead demons proved to be of no avail. Nandi killed 
Tarakasura after a fierce duel. 
The demons were disheartened, but Maya reassured them. ‘Don‘t forget the 
boon,’ he said, ‘There are only some special conditions under which Tripura 
can be destroyed. Otherwise it is indestructible. Pushya nakshatra is in the sky 
now and soon the three cities will come together as one. The only person who 
can destroy it then is Shiva. And he must do it with a single arrow. All we have 
to do is ensure that Shiva cannot shoot the arrow and we are safe.’ But this 
was easier said than done. It was no mean task to repel Shiva and his cohorts. 
Nandi killed Vidyunmali a second time. As soon as the three cities came 
together, Shiva shot a flaming arrow which completely burnt up Tripura and 
all the demons who were within. The only one who was saved was Maya. He 
did not die because he was extremely devoted to Shiva. Ever since that day, 
Maya has lived under the water. 
THE MEASUREMENT OF TIME  

1205 
 



The smallest unit of time is a nimesha; this is the amount of time it takes to 
blink. Fifteen nimeshas make one kashtha and thirty kashthas are one kala. 
Thirty kalas one muhurta and there are thirty muhurtas in one divaratra (one 
day). Fifteen muhurtas constitute the day and fifteen muhurtas make up the 
night. One month for humans is one day for the ancestors (pitri). 
Shuklapaksha is the lunar fortnight during which the moon waxes and 
krishnapaksha is the lunar fortnight during which the moon wanes. 
Shuklapaksha corresponds to night for the ancestors and krishnapaksha 
corresponds to day. Thus, thirty human months are merely one month for the 
ancestors. Three hundred and sixty human months are one year for the 
ancesotrs. One human year is one divaratara for the Gods. The human year is 
divided into two ayanas, each consisting of six months. These are known as 
uttarayana and dakshinayana. Uttarayana is day for the Gods and 
dakshinayana is night. Thirty human years are one month for the Gods and 
three hundred and sixty human years are one year for the Gods. Time is 
divided into four yugas (eras). These are known as satya yuga or krita yuga, 
treta yuga, dvapara yuga and kali yuga. The lengths of these yugas are defined 
in terms of years of the Gods. 
Satya yuga has four thousand years of the Gods, treta yuga three thousand, 
dvapara yuga two thousand and kali yuga one thousand. A cycle of satya yuga, 
treta yuga, dvapara yuga and kali yuga is known as a mahayuga. Thus, a 
mahayuga would seem to consist of ten thousand years of the Gods. But this 
is not quite correct. In between any two yugas are intervening periods, known 
as sandhyamshas. For example, the sandhyamsha for satya yuga is four 
hundred years, for teta yuga three hundred years, for dvapara yuga two 
hundred years and for kali yuga one hundred years.  
Once one adds the sandhyamshas, a mahayuga adds up to twelve thousand 
years of the Gods. A little over seventy-one yugas constitute one manvantara. 
Fourteen such manvantaras are one kalpa. A kalpa is merely one day for 
Brahma. At the end of Brahma‘s day, the universe is destroyed. It is then 
created afresh when a new day dawns for Brahma. 

1206 
 



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE YUGAS  
As one progressively moves down the scale from satya yuga to kali yuga, the 
power of righteous diminishes and evil starts to triumph. In treta yuga people 
were righteous. The system of varnashrama dharma goes back to treta yuga. 
This is typified in the principle of four varnas (classes) and four ashramas 
(stages of life). The four varnas are brhamanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and 
shudras. Each class has its proper place, each its assigned occupations as 
determined by the principles of division of labour. The four ashramas are 
brhamacharya (celibate studenthood). 
Garhasthya (householder stage), vanaprastha (forest-dwelling stage), and 
sannyasa (hermithood). 
Everyone followed the tenets of varnashrama aharma in treta yuga. 
Individuals were equally handsome and equally wealthy. Poverty and disease 
were unknown. The weather was clement and, initialy, there was no need to 
build houses. Cities and villages were not known. People lived freely in the 
mountains and on the shores of the oceans. But as people became evil, the 
weather turned inclement. Houses had to built so the people might be 
protected from the heat and the cold. Cities and villages were planned and 
constructed. Evil became even more prevalent in dvapara yuga. In some cases, 
individuals began to practise that which was against the dictates of 
varnashrama dharma. To bring men back to the righteous path, the 
knowledge of the sacred Vedas had to be disseminated amongst humans. To 
this end, the great Vedavyasa divided the Vedas into four. Various other 
shastras (sacred texts) were also composed in dvapara yuga. 
These include ayurveda (medicine), jyotisha (astronomy) and arthashastra 
(economics). Hatred, jealousy, warfare and other evils first originated in 
dvapara yuga. Individuals did not stick to their own classes while marrying, 
and cross-breeds started to be born. But some remnants of righteousness 
could still be found, so that average life expectancies amounted to two 
thousand years. Kali yuga is the worst of the four eras. Theft, hatred, 

1207 
 



falsehood, fraudulence and egotism become the norm. As a natural corollary 
to such evils, drought and famine recur again and again. 
Event the Brahmans are led astray. They do not study the Vedas, nor do they 
perform yajnas. The Brahmanas degenerate so much that they mix with 
shudras. As for the shudras, they become kings. Can anything more ridiculous 
be imagined? Shudras even start to study the Vedas. Evil always has its effect. 
Disease becomes rampant and life expectancies go down. 
VAJRANAGA 
Indra had killed many of Diti‘s children, the daityas. Diti had wished to obtain 
a son who would kill Indra. But because she had not been able to adhere to 
the stipulated religious rites, the sons who had been born had become friends 
and companions of Indra. But Indra continued to attack and kill the demons. 
Diti therefore prayed to her husband Kashyapa yet again that she might have 
a son who would defeat Indra. ‘Your wish will be granted,’ said Kashyapa. ‘But 
you will have to meditate hard for ten thousand years. Indra‘s weapon is the 
vajra and the son who will be born will have a body (anga) that is as tough as 
the vajra will be able to do him no harm. Diti meditated for ten thousand 
years and in due course, gave birth to this powerful son. Vajranga was 
invincible. When Vajranga grew up, Didti told her son, ‘Indra has killed many 
of my sons. I am thirsting for revenge. Go and kill Indra.’ Vajranga set for 
heaven. He defeated Indra very easily and tied him up. He then brought Indra 
home to his mother and prepared to kill the king of the Gods. Indra‘s death 
would have been a great calamity and Brahma and Kashyapa rushed there. 
‘Vajranga,’ they said. ‘Please do not kill Indra. Let him go. If someone who 
deserves respect is insulted, that is like death for him. Indra has been 
defeated by you. He has therefore been insulted and is as good as dead. There 
is no need to physically kill him. Moreover, the very fact that you are letting 
Indra go at our request will be known to all. Even if he lives, everyone is going 
to regard him as dead. Listen to our request and let him go.’ ‘I am not averse 
to that suggestion at all,’ replied Vajranga. ‘I have no intention of killing Indra. 

1208 
 



I was merely obeying my mother‘s instructions. How can I refuse two such 
revered individuals like you? One of you is the creator of the whole universe 
and the other one is my own father. I will let Indra go. But please grant me a 
boon. Grant me the boon that I may be able to perform a lot of tapasya.’ This 
boon was readily granted. In addition, Brahma created a beautiful woman 
named Varangi and married her off to Vajranga. 
Vajranga went to the forest to meditate. For a thousand years, he stood with 
his arms raised up towards the sky. And in this posture, he meditated. He then 
stood on his head for a thousand years more and meditated. As a final part of 
the tapasya, he wished to meditate under the water for a thousand years 
more. When Vajranga entered the water, his wife Varangi patiently waited for 
her husband to return. And all the while, she too meditated. But Indra was not 
going to let sleeping dogs lie. He adopted the form of a monkey and uprooted 
all the trees in Varangi‘s hermitage. He next adopted the form of a sheep and 
ate up all the grass that was there. As a snake, he tried to bite the lady. Finally, 
he adopted the form of a cloud and drenched the hermitage in torrents of 
rain. Since Varangi was meditating, she was in no position to retaliate or 
protect herself. She had to bear all these depredations. 
When the thousand years were over, Vajranga returned. He was shocked to 
learn of the tortures that his wife had been subjected to by Indra. He began to 
meditae again. This time, he wished for a son who would kill Indra. Brahma 
appeared and granted Vajranga the desired boon. ‘You will have a son who 
will be the scourge of the Gods,’ said Brahma. ‘He will be called Taraka.’ For a 
thousand years Varangi bore the baby in her womb. When Taraka was born, 
the earth trembled and tidal waves were created in the ocean. Fierce storms 
started to rage. Wild animals rejoiced and the sages shuddered. In due course, 
Taraka was crowned the king of the demons. 
TARAKA’S TAPASYA  
Tarka was hell bent upon defeating the Gods. But he realize that, prior to 
waging war on the Gods, he would have to become powerful. Such powers 
could not be attained through tapasya. 

1209 
 



Taraka went to the Pariparta mountains and selected a cave there for his 
meditation. For some days Taraka ate nothing, for some more days he 
survived only on water, and on other days he ate only leaves, Every day he 
sliced off some flesh from his body and offered it to the fire as a token of his 
devotion. All this hardship pleased Brahma and he appeared before Taraka. 
‘Enough is enough,’ said Brahma. ‘I am pleased at your devotion. What boon 
can I grant you?’ ‘I want to fight with the Gods,’ replied Taraka. ‘The Gods 
have been giving the demons a hard time and I intended to reverse the tide. 
Please grant me the boon that I may be invincible and immortal.’ ‘Immortality 
is not a boon that can be granted to any living being.’ Said Brahma. ‘All living 
beings must die. But if you want, set fairly difficult conditions for your death.’ 
‘In that case, please grant me the boon that I can only be killed by a seven 
year old child,’ requested Taraka. 
Brahma gladly granted this boon. 
THE WAR BETWEEN THE GODS AND THE DEMONS  
Fortified with Brahma‘s boon, Taraka started to rule the demons. After some 
years had passed and after Taraka had raised a strong army, he decided to 
attack heaven. A huge army of demons was accordingly raised. There were 
thousands of elephants, horses and chariots in the army. 
Apart from Taraka, the major generals in the army were Jambha, Kujambha, 
Mahisha, Kunjara, Megha, Kalanemi, Nimi, Mathana, Jambhaka, and 
Shumbha. Diverse were the weapons that the demons armed themselves 
with. The Gods also prepared themselves for the war, having first appointed 
Yama as their general. Yama rode into battle on a bufflao. Indra had his 
chariot, driven by his charioteer Matali. The fire-God Agni rode on a goat and 
Varuna, the Lord of the oceans, rode a snake. Amongst the other Gods who 
were in the army were Chandra, Surya and Kubera, the God of prosperity and 
wealth. The war was terrible to behold. The trumpeting of elephants, the 
neighing of horses and the beating of drums made a terrible racket Above all 
this there was the noise of weapons clanging and bows twanging. Chariots 
fought with Chariots, elephants with elephants, horses with horses and foot-

1210 
 



soldiers with foot-soldiers. The sky was thick with spears, maces, axes, swords, 
tridents, clubs and arrows flying around. Dead bodies littered the battlefield 
and rivers of blood began to flow. Yama fought a fierce duel with a demon 
named Grasana and Kubera fought with Jambha. Kujambha also fought with 
Kubera and put Kubera to flight. Kalanemi fought with both Chandra and 
Surya. The two Ashvinis received a sound thrashing at Kalanemi‘s hands. The 
news that the Gods were being slaughtered reached Vishnu and Vishnu joined 
the fight. 
The demons immediately attacked Vishnu, but were no match for him. One of 
Vishnu‘s maces knocked Kalanemi unconscious. Vishnu‘s cakra sliced off 
Grasana‘s head. Jambha did manage to knock Vishnu unconscious with a club. 
But Indra slew Jambha with a divine weapon. The trouble however was with 
Taraka. When he came to fight, the Gods had no option but to flee. 
Those who did not, were captured and imprisoned. The demon won a 
resounding victory. 
BRAHMA’S ADVICE 
Those of the Gods who had survived the battle and were still free started to 
pray to Brahma. 
‘What can I do for you?’ asked Brahma. Why are all of you looking so 
despondent?’ ‘You are the one who is responsible for our misfortune,’ replied 
the Gods. ‘You have granted Taraka a boon that has made him virtally 
invincible. Armed with this boon, he is oppressing the universe and has 
soundly thrashed us. What are we to do now?’ ‘There is no cause for such 
despondency,’ said Brahma. ‘Taraka is not immortal. He will be slain by a 
seven year old child. 
Unfortunately that child has not yet been born. He will be the son of Shiva. 
The problem is that Shiva is unmarried. He was earlier married to Sati, but Sati 
immolated herself at the time of a yajna. She has now been reborn as Parvati. 
The task at hand is to get Shiva and Parvati married. 

1211 
 



Their son will kill Taraka.’ It was necessary to make Shiva fall in love with 
Parvati. Madana, the God of love, was sent by Indra to Shiva‘s hermitage so 
that this might be achieved. But because this disturbed Shiva‘s meditation, 
Shiva burnt Madana up. Meanwhile, Parvati had begun to perform tapasya so 
that she might have Shiva for a husband. For one hundred years more, she ate 
only one leaf a day. 
And for the final hundred years, she meditated fasting. The seven great sages 
went and told Shiva about Parvati‘s tapasya and Shiva agreed to marry 
Parvati. The marriage took place amidst a great deal of fanfare. All the rivers 
and the mountains came to attend the ceremony. So did the sages, the Gods, 
the gandharvas, the apsaras and the yakshas. Brahma himself acted as the 
priest for the marriage ceremony. 
KALI BECOMES GOURI  
On one particular occasion, Shiva addressed Parvati as ‘Kali.’ The word kali 
means dark and Parvati thought that Shiva referring to her dark complexion. 
She did not realize that Shiva was merely trying to tease her a bit. Greatly 
incensed at the imagined slight, Parvarti decided that she would meditate so 
that she might become fair. She wore clothing made of barks of trees and 
performed tapasya. In the summer she prayed inside a raging fire and in the 
winter she prayed under the water. Sometimes, she ate only roots and fruits. 
At other times, she fasted. Prior to leaving for her tapasaya, Parvati had 
instructed Nandi that he was to stand guard at Shiva‘s door and permit no 
other woman to enter. 
There was a demon named Adi. This fellow had performed a lot of tapasya 
and had manage to please Brahma. When Brahma agreed to grant him a 
boon. Adi asked for the boon of immortality. Brahma naturally refused this 
boon. He however granted Adi the boon that the demon would die only when 
he changd his form twice, not otherwise. Adi happened to come to Shiva and 
Parvati‘s house and discovered Nandi standing guard at the door. Wondering 
what there was to be guarded, he adopted the form of a snake and slithered 
in. Nandi did not notice the snake, but this was Adi‘s first transformation. 

1212 
 



Inside the house, Adi encountered Shiva and thought that he would play a 
trick on Shiva. He adopted Parvati‘s form. This was his second transformation. 
In the form of Parvati, Adi went up to Shiva and greeted him. Initially, Shiva 
did not realize that this was not Parvati. He greeted the demon and said, 
‘Darling, I am delighted tht you have returned. I can see that your rage has 
cooled down.’ But in a little while Shiva realized that this was not Parvati. He 
slew the demon. Meanwhile, Parvati was continuing with her tapsaya and 
pleased Brahma with her prayers. Brahma granted her the boon that she 
would become fair. Since the word gouri means fair, Parvati was thereafter 
known as Gouri. A Goddess named Koushiki emerged out of Parvati‘s cells, 
thus named because the word kosha means cell. 
The darkness of Parvati‘s complexion entered Koushiki‘s body. Brahma 
requested the Goddess Koushiki to go and live in the Vindhya mountains. She 
is therefore also known as Vindhyavasini. 
KARTIKEYA AND TARAKA  
Kartikeya or Skanda was born after some days. The boys shone with the 
radiance of a thousand suns and had six (shada) faces (anana). He was 
therefore also known as Shadanana. The Gods armed Kartikeya with diverse 
weapons and appointed him their general. They requested him to kill the 
demon Taraka and arrangements were made for the battle. When Taraka saw 
Kartikeya he said, ‘What is a boy like you doing in a battlefield? Go and play 
with a ball instead.’ A battlefield is not the place for idle talk,’ replied 
Kartikeya. ‘Show me your prowess instead.’ At these words, Taraka flung a 
club at Kartikeya. But Kartikeya easily repelled the club with a vajra. The 
demon next hurled an axe, but Kartikeya effortless caught the axe in his hand. 
He then struck the demon with a club of his own. This angered Taraka so 
much that the demon showered all sorts of weapons on Kartikeya. But the boy 
repelled all of these and started to kill demons with his own weapons. Many 
demons fled in dismay. As for Taraka himself, Kartikeya‘s spear pierced him in 
the chest and killed him. Thus it was that Brahma‘s boon became true. 
HIRANYAKASHIPU  

1213 
 



Diti had a son named Hiranyakashipu. This demon meditated for eleven 
thousand years under the water. Throught this period, he did not eat or talk at 
all. These meditations pleased Brahma and Brahma offered to grant 
Hiranyakasipu a boon. ‘What boon do you wish for?’ he asked. ‘If you are 
pleased, grant me the following boon,’ replied the demon. ‘I will not be killed 
by Gods, demons, gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas or snakes. I will not be killed 
by humans or ghosts. The sages will not be able to curse me. I will not killed by 
a weapon, a mountain or a tree. I will not be killed during the day or at night. I 
will not be killed by something that is dry or by something that is wet.’ This 
rather strange boon Brahma granted. But the sages, the Gods, the gandarvas 
and the snakes went and complained to Brahma. ‘What have you done?’ they 
asked. ‘This demon is now going to oppress the entire universe.’ ‘Don‘t worry,’ 
replied Brahma. ‘When the time comes, Vishnu himself will kill 
Hiranyakashipu.’ But true to expectations, the demon started to oppress the 
world. He destroyed the hermitages of the sages and drove the Gods out of 
heaven. All yajnas were stopped. The Gods and the sages started praying to 
Vishnu. Stirred by these prayers, Vishnu adopted the form of a strange being 
who was half-man and half-lion. Since nara means man and simha means lion, 
this being was called Narasimha. Narasimha went on a visit to 
Hiranyakashipu‘s court. Hiranyakashipu had a son named Prahlada and at the 
sight of Narasimha. Prahlada exclaimed. ‘I have a strong suspicion that this 
being is none other than Vishnu and that we demons will suffer at his hands.’ 
Hiranyakashipu asked his soldiers to capture the creature. Or, if that proved to 
be impossible, to kill it. But the soldiers could do no such thing; Narasimha 
killed them all. Hiranyakasipu then himself hurled all sorts of weapons at 
Narasimha. But great was his bewilderment at finding that all these weapons 
could do the strange creature no harm. Any weapons could do the strange 
creature no harm. Any weapon that was hurled was simply swallowed up by 
Narasimha. The rocks that were flung at him could not even reach him. 
Narasimha grasped Hiranyakashipu and placed him across his thighs. He then 
tore apart the demon‘s chest with his claws. Thus, Hiranyakashipu was not 
killed by a weapon, a mountain or a tree, or by something that was either wet 

1214 
 



or dry. Vishnu in his Narasimha form was not a God, a demon, a gandharva, a 
yaksha, a rakshasa, a snake, a human or a ghost. Since the slaying took place 
in the evening, it was neither night nor day. All the conditions of Brahma‘s 
boon were met. The entire world rejoiced at the demon-king‘s death. 
SAVITRI  
There used to be a king named Ashvapati who ruled in the kingdom of Madra. 
Ashvapati had no sons. He therefore began to pray to the Goddess Savitri so 
that he might have a son. He performed thousands and thousands of yajnas. 
Eventually the Goddess appeared before the king and said, ‘You will not have 
a son. But I am going to grant you a daughter.‘ The daughter was named 
Malati. But since she was born as a result of a boon received from the 
Goddess Savitri, she was more popularly known as Savitri. When Savitri grew 
up, she was married to Satyavana, the son of King Dyumatsena. The sage 
Narada once came to visit them and told them. 
Satyavana is going to die within a year.’ Hearing this, Savitri and Satyavana 
went off to the forest to prepare themselves for the impending death. 
When only four days of the appointed life span were left, Savitri observed a 
religious rite that has now become famous savitri rata. Amongst other things, 
this involved fasting for a period of three days On the fourth and final day, 
Satyavana went to collect fodder, roots and fruits in the dense part of the 
forest and Savitri also accompanied her husband. When they were tired, 
Savitri sat down beside a pond to rest. Satyavana continued to collect fodder 
and firewood near the pond. 
While he was thus engaged, he started to suffer from a splitting headache. 
‘Savitri,’ he said, ‘I cannot bear this pain any longer. Let me rest for a while 
with my head in your lap.’ While Satyavana was resting with his head on 
Savitri‘s lap, Yama arrived to claim Satyavana. Yama‘s complexion was dark 
and he was dressed entirely in yellow. His crown was golden. Armlets graced 
his arms and necklaces hung around his neck. 

1215 
 



In each human body there is an entity that is only the size of a finger in length. 
This is the part of the body that is claimed by Yama and taken to his abode. 
When this is done, only the dead body is left. Yama tied up Satyavana‘s 
minute body in a noose and prepared to take it to his abode. 
But when Yama left, Savitri followd him. ‘Where do you think you are going?’ 
asked yama. ‘I am following my husband,’ replied Savitri. ‘There is no greater 
duty for a wife than serving her husband. Since my husband is leaving, I have 
to leave with him.’ ‘I am pleased at your devotion,’ said Yama. ‘Ask for a boon 
and I shall grant it to you. The only thing that you cannot ask for is that 
Satyavana be brought back to life.’ ‘My father-in-law has become blind,’ 
replied Saviti. ‘He can therefore no longer be the king. Please grant me the 
boon that his eyesight is restored so that he can become the king again.’ ‘I 
grant you that.’ Said Yama. ‘Now please return. You will unnecessarily get 
tired if you follow me.’ ‘How I can get tired if I follow you?’ asked Savitri. ‘You 
are the chief of all the Gods. Is it possible to get tired if one follows you?’ ‘That 
pleases me even more,’ said Yama. ‘Ask for another boon. But under no 
circumstances are you allowed to ask that Satyavana be brought back to life.’ 
‘My father has no sons,’ replied Savitri. ‘Please grant me the boon that he may 
have a hundred sons.’ ‘I grant you that,’ said Yama. ‘Now return. Go and 
perform your husband‘s funeral rites. Serve your parents and parents-in-law 
well. You are unnecessarily tiring yourself by following me around.’ ‘I thank 
you for your advice.’ Replied Savitri. ‘But I have already told you that I cannot 
possibly get tired. You are the Lord of dharma, the Lord of righteousness. Can 
one possibly tire oneself by following such a person?’ ‘Your devotion is truly 
amazing,’ ‘Ask for another boon. 
But do not ask for Satyavana‘s life.’ ‘Please grant me the boon that Satyavana 
and I may have a hundred sons,’ requested Savitri. Yama granted the boon 
without thinking and Savitri then pointed out that what Yama had agreed to 
would be impossible if Satyavana died. Yama had no option but to restore 
Satyavana to life. Yama blessed Savitri and went away. In due course, 

1216 
 



Satyavana and Savitri had a hundred sons named that Malvas. Savitri is a 
model for all devoted wives to follow. 
VALI  
There was a demon named Vali who was descended from Hiranyakashipu. 
Extemely strong, he defeated the Gods and drove them out of heaven. The 
mother of all the Gods was Aditi and Aditi was despondent that her sons 
should suffer so at the hands of demons. She therefore began to pray to 
Vishnu so that she might have a powerful son who would provide a fitting 
reply tot he demons, particularily to Vali. For a thousand years, Aditi 
meditated. Vishnu was pleased at these prayers and appeared before Aditi. 
‘What boon do you wish for?’ he asked. ‘The demons are oppressing my 
children,’ replied Aditi. ‘Please grant me a son who will defeat the demons.’ 
‘Do not despair,’ said Vishnu. ‘I myself will be born as your son. I will take care 
of the demons.’ You will remember that Aditi‘s husband was the sage 
Kashyapa. Kashyapa and Aditi accordingly had a son. This son was a dwarf 
(vamana). 
Vali happened to organize a yajna and the dwarf came to attend the 
ceremony. On the occasion of the yajna. Vali had decided that he would not 
refuse anyone what he asked for. Shukracharya was the preceptor of the 
demons and naturally, he was Vali‘ guru as well. Shukracharya saw through 
the trickery that was involved and realized that the dwarf was none other 
than Vishnu. 
He tried to put Vali on his guard and warned Vali that he should not grant 
what the dwarf asked for. 
But Vali would not listen. ‘Vishnu is the Lord of everything.’ He said. ‘I am 
indeed fortunate if Vishnu has come to grace my ceremony in the disguise of a 
dwarf. How can I refuse what he asks for?’ Vali welcomed the dwarf with 
offerings. ‘What is your desire?’ he asked. ‘I am duty bound to give you what 
you ask for.’ ‘I desire nothing much,’ replied the dwarf. ‘I do not want gold or 
riches or elephants or horses. All that I ask for is as much of land as can be 

1217 
 



covered in three of my footsteps.’ ‘Granted,’ said Vali. No sooner were the 
words uttered that he dwarf assumed a gigantic form. His head rose way up 
into the sky. With each one of his footsteps, Vishnu covered one of the three 
worlds. Thus Vali ended up by donating all of the three worlds to Vishnu and 
there was nowhere for the demons to live in. But Vishnu was pleased at Vali‘s 
generosity. He therefore decreed that, henceforth, the demons would live in 
the underworld. As for heaven, it was returned to Indra. This was the story of 
Vishnu‘s dwarf incarnation. 
THE BOAR INCARNATION  
At the end of the last kalpa, there was a general destruction and the universe 
was flooded with water. Vishnu alone slept on this water in his form of 
Narayana. When it was time for creation to begin, Brahma appeared inside an 
egg. All the worlds that would be there in the universe and all the beings who 
would populate these worlds were inside the egg. But before creation could 
start, the earth had to be created so that living beings might have a place to 
live in. When the earth was first created, it was full of mountain ranges and 
these mountains were exceedingly heavy. The upshot of this was that the 
earth could not bear the weight of these mountains and started to get 
immersed in the water. She went all the way down to the underworld. The 
earth started to pray to Vishnu so that she might be saved. Vishnu adopted 
the form of a gigantic boar (varaha). He entered the water and raised the 
earth up on his tusks. He laid her to rest on the water, having first levelled out 
the mountains. This was the story of Vishnu‘s boar incarnation. 
THE CHURNING OF THE OCEAN  
The Gods and the demons always fought with one another. In the process, 
many demons and Gods were killed. This was no problem for the demons. 
Their teacher, Shukracharya, knew the art of mritasanjivani and immediately 
brought the dead demons back to life. But the Gods who were killed stayed 
dead. The Gods went to Brahma for his advice. ‘Having a temporaty truce with 
the demons,’ said Brahma. ‘Unite with them and churn the ocean. This 
churning will make you immortal and you will have no reason to fear the 

1218 
 



demons.’ The Gods went to meet Vali, the king of the demons, with the 
proposal and Vali agreed to the temporary truce. Preparations were made for 
the churning of the ocean. Mount Mandara was used as the rod for churning 
and the great snake Vasuki agreed to be the churning-rope. The problem 
however was the Mount Mandara had no base to rest on. And without a base, 
the peak would move and the churning could not proceed. The great Vishnu 
adopted the form of a huge turtle (kurma). The back of the turtle provided the 
base on which Mount Mandara could rest. The churning started. The Gods 
held Vasuki‘s tail and the demons the head. The churning went on for a 
thousand years of the Gods. The first object to emerge as a result of the 
churning was the moon, Chandra. Shiva accepted Chandra as an adornment 
for his forehead. 
Lakshmi, the Goddess of wealth and prosperity, merged next and was united 
with Vishnu, Sura, the Goddess of wine and drinking, came out next. She was 
followed by the divine horse Uchchaishrava. This was appropriated by Indra. A 
beautiful jewel named koustubha came out next and was accepted by Vishnu 
as his adornment. After these wonderous objects had come out, smoke 
started to billow out and clouded the atmosphere. The cloud was followed by 
tongues of fire which threatened to burn up the Gods and the demons. From 
the fire there came out all sorts of poisonous snakes and venomous insects. 
This was followed by a terrible poison known as kalakuta. No one knew what 
to do with the poison, it would have killed them all. The Gods and the demons 
began to pray to Shiva for deliverance. Shiva appeared and swallowed up the 
poison. 
It suck in his throat and made his throat blue in colour. Since nila means blue 
and kantha means throat, Shiva came to be known as Nilakantha. 
With the danger removed, the churning continued and Dhanvantari came out 
of the ocean. He was the physician of the Gods and the originator of medicine 
(ayurveda). Dhanvantari held the pot of amrita in his hands. The demons 
immediately started to fight over the possession of the amrita. But Vishnu 
adopted the form of a beautiful woman (known as mohini). This woman was 

1219 
 



so pretty that all the demons fell in love with her and gladly handed over the 
pot of amrita to her. 
But they continued to fight with the Gods. While the fighting went on, Vishnu 
secretly fed the Gods the amrita. The Gods became immortal. The demons 
received no amrita, not a single drop. 
That was not quite true. There was a demon named Rahu. He adopted the 
form of a God and managed to get a little bit of the amrita. But Surya and 
Chandra spotted the deception and pointed it out to Vishnu. Vishnu promptly 
severed Rahu‘s head with his chakra. The amrita never percolated down 
beyond Rahu‘s throat. But the demon‘s head had had its share of the amrita 
and became immortal. Rahu never forgave Surya and Chandra for telling on 
him. Rahu‘s head tries to swallow up the sun and the moon, given a chance. 
You can see this happening at the time of the solar and lunar eclipses. This 
was the story of Vishnu‘s turtle incarnation. 
ARCHITECTURE  
The science of architecture owes its origin to eighteen great sages. Their 
names are Bhrigu, Atri, Vashishtha, Vishvakarma, Maya, Narada, Nagnajita, 
Vishalaksha, Puranadara, Brahma, Kartikeya, Nandishvara, Shounaka, Garga, 
Vasudeva, Aniruddha, Shukra, and Brihaspati The building of a house should 
never be begun in the month of Chaitra. A person who does this is sure to 
contract a disease. The month of Vaishakha is a good time to begin. One who 
does this is bound to own many cows. The months of Agrahayana, Magha and 
Falguna are also auspicious. 
An individual who begins the task in Agrahayana has full granaires, one who 
begins it in Magha attains all sorts of riches and one who begins it in Falguna 
obtains gold and sons. Ashada is also a good month to start. Servants and 
animals are owed by a person who starts the building in Ashada. But the 
months of Jyaishtha, Shravana, Bhadra, Ashvina and Pousha are inauspicious. 
If you start in Jyaishta, you will die soon; you will also die if you begin in 
Shravana; begin in Bhadra and you will suffer from all manner of lesses; your 

1220 
 



wife will die if you start the task in the month of Ashvina; and all your goods 
will be stolen if you start in the month of Pousha. It is best to begin the 
building of a house when the nakshatras Ashvini, Rohini, Mula, 
Uttarabhadrapada, Uttarashada, Uttarafalguni or Mrigashira are in the sky. 
Any day is permissible with the exception of Sunday and Tuesday. 
The ground on which the house is to be build has to be tested. A pit should be 
dug and a sapling planted. If the sapling thrives and growns into a big tree, the 
ground has been well-chosen. But if the tree withers away or does not grow 
into a strong tree, one ought to move somewhere else. A diagram is then 
drawn on the ground, in the form of a square with eighty-one smaller squares 
inside it. That is the larger square will be subdivided into nine squares along 
very side. Nine multiplied by nine gives the eighty-one smaller squares. In 
each of these eighty-one smaller squares, a specific God has to be 
worshipped. There are different types of houses. A house that has doors on all 
four sides is known as a sarvatobhadra. Such a configuration is recommended 
for palaces or temples. A house that does not have a door to the west is 
known as a nandyavarta; a house that does not have a door to the south is 
known as a varddhamana; a house that does not have a door to the east is 
known as a svastika; and a house that does not have a door to the north is 
known as ruchaka. A palace should be one hundred and eight cubits (hand-
lengths) in length. 
If a prince, and not a king, is to live in the palace, sixty-six cubits are the 
recommmended length. 
Other recommended lengths are sixty-four cubits for generals, forty-eight 
cubits for ministers, twenty-eight cubits for artisans and twelve cubits for 
messengers and guards. Priests and physicians are entitled to twenty-four 
cubits. An ordinary householder should build a house that is thirty-two cubits 
in length. The sole exception is an outcast, he is entitled to only sixteen cubits. 
There should not be any trees in the front of the house. But trees have to be 
planted towards the back. The wood with which the house has to be built 
must be carefully chosen. One must not cut down a tree that birds have built 

1221 
 



nests on. Certain trees must never be chosen. These include those that have 
been gashed by an elephant or struck by lightning. They also include trees that 
grow near temples or at the of rivers and trees from cremation grounds. 
Neem trees and mango trees must never be used for building houses. The 
height of the tree should be multiplied by its circumference. This product 
should now be divided by eight. If the remainder that is left is one, the timber 
can be used in building any part of the house. Such timber is known as dhvaja. 
When the remainder is two the timber is known vrisha and should be used in 
constructing the western door. When the remainder is three the timber is 
called simha and should be used for the northern door. The name is vrishabha 
if the remainder is four and such wood should be used for the eastern door. 
When the remainder is five the timber is given the name of hasti and should 
be used for the southern door. 
IDOLS  
Idols have to be instated in temples. Vishnu‘s image should have either eight 
hands or four. If there are eight hands, the arms to the right should hold a 
shankha (concha-shell), a gada (mace), a shara (arrow) and a padma (lotus). 
The arms to the left should hold dhanu (bow), a padma, a shankha and a 
chakra (bladed-discus). If there are four hands, the mace and the lotus should 
be to the right and the chakra and the conch-shell to the left. Vishnu will be 
shown standing on the world. Garuda, the king of the birds, bears him around 
Garuda will therefore be shown at Vishnu‘s feet, towards the right. Lakshmi‘s 
image must always be to the left of Vishnu‘s image and Lakshmi will hold a 
lotus in her hand. The best idols are made out of gold, silver, copper, jewels, 
stone, wood, from alloys. The proportions of the various parts of the body 
must be exactly right. Shiva‘s image must have matted hair and he must wear 
a crescent moon on his forehead. The idol must convey the impression that 
Shiva is sixteen years old. Shiva must be dressed in tigerskin and must be 
garlanded with snakes. A peacock feather should adorn on ear. 
If a spear, a rod or a trident are shown, they must be to the right. And if a 
skull, a snake or a sword are shown, they must be to the left. When Shiva is 

1222 
 



show riding a bull, his image has two hands. But when he is shown in a 
dancing posture, the image has ten hands. If the intention is to show him 
destroying Tripura, the image must have sixteen hands. There is one particular 
image that deserves special mention. This is known as arddhanarishvara, half-
male and half-female. 
The Shiva part of the image will be to the right and the Parvati part of the 
image will be to the left. The right hand of the image will hold a skull or a 
trident and the left hand of the image will hold a lotus or a mirror. There is 
another type of image known as Uma-Maheshvara. In this case, there are two 
separate images, one of Shiva and the other of Parvati. The idols of various 
other Gods and Goddesses are also described. 
PAVILIONS (MANDAPA)  
These are classified in terms of the number of pillars that are used in their 
construction, and there are twenty-seven main types of pavilions. (i) A 
pushpaka pavilion has sixty-four pillars. (ii) A pushpabhadra pavilion has sixty-
two pillars. (iii) A suvrata pavilion has sixty pillars. (iv) An amritanandana 
pavilion has fifty-eight pillars. (v) A doushalya pavilion has fifty-six pillars. (vi) A 
buddhisamkirna pavilion has fifty-four pillars. (vii) A gajabhadra pavilion has 
fifty-two pillars. 
(viii) A jayavaha pavilion has fifty pillars. (ix) A shrivatsa pavilion has forty-eight 
pillars. (x) A vijaya pavilion has forty-six pillars. (xi) A vastukirti pavilion has 
forty-four pillars. (xii) A shrutinjaya pavilion has forty-two pillars. (xiii) A 
yajnabhadra pavilion has forty pillars. (xiv) A vishala pavilion has thirty-eight 
pillars. (xv) A sushlishta pavilion has thirty-six pillars. (xvi) A shatrumardana 
pavilion has thrity-four pillars. (xvii) A bhagapancha pavilion has thrity-two 
pillars. (xviii) A nandana pavilion has thirty pillars. (xix) A manava pavilion has 
twenty-eight pillars. (xx) A manabhadraka pavilion has twenty-six pillars. (xxi) 
A sugriva pavilion has twenty-four pillars. (xxii) A hairta pavilion has twenty-
two pillars. (xxiii) A karnikara pavilion has twenty pillars. (xxiv) A shatarddhika 
pavilion has eighteen pillars. (xxv) A simha pavilion has sixteen pillars. (xxvi) A 

1223 
 



shyamabhadra pavilion has fourteen pillars. (xxvii) A samudra pavilion has 
twelve pillars. Pavilions should be triangular, semi-circular or rectangular. 
DONATIONS  
There are different methods of donating alms. One of the most sacred is 
known as tulapurusha. 
In this, a pair of scales is used. The person who is donating the alms ascends 
on one side of the scales and gold is placed on the other side until the scales 
are exactly balanced. This is the amount of gold that has to be donated if 
punya is to be acquired. A second sort of donation is known as hiranyagarbha. 
In this, a pot full of gold is donated. In a third form of donation a model of the 
universe (brahmanda) is fashioned out of gold and donated. This form of 
donation is therfore known as Brahmanda. The fourth form of donation is 
known as kalpadapa. In this, a tree is made out of gold and donated. The fifth 
form of donation is known as gosahasra and involves the donation of a 
thousand cows. The sixth form of donation is known as kamadhenu. The 
object of donation in this case is a cow and calf, both made out of gold. The 
seventh form of donation is similar and is known as hiranyashva. A horse 
made out of gold is donated. The eighth form of donation is called ashvaratha. 
A horse (ashva) and four chariots (ratha) have to be donated and both have to 
be made out of gold. Hemahastiratha is the ninth form of donation. The 
objects or donation in this case are an elephant and a chariot made out of 
gold. 
The tenth form of donation is known as panchalngalaka. In this case, ten 
ploughs are donated. 
Five of them have to be made of wood and the remaining five have to be 
made of gold. The eleven form of donation is dhara. Int his case,a golden 
model of the earth is donated. The twelfth form of donation is known as 
vishvachakra. The object that is donated is again a model made out of gold. 
The model is that of the universe in the shape of a wheel. The thirteenth form 
of donation is mahakalapalaka. Ten creepers made out of God are donated. 

1224 
 



The fourteenth form of donation is saptasagara. Pits are made in the ground, 
there being seven of them. Each pit stands for one of the seven oceans. In the 
first pit is put salt, in the second milk, in the third clarified butter, in the fourth 
molasses, in the fifth curds, in the sixth sugar and in the seventh holy water. 
An image of a God or Goddess is then placed in each pit- Brahma in the first, 
Vishnu in the second, Shiva in the third, Surya in the fourth, Yama in the fifth. 
Lakshmi in the sixth and Parvati in the seventh. The images must be made out 
of gold. The pits are then filed to the brim with jewels and the entire contents 
donated. 
The fifteenth form of donation is called ratnadhenu. In this case, a cow made 
out of gold is donated. The nose, the eyes, the brows and various other parts 
of the cow should be made out of jewels. The sixteen form of donation is 
called mahabhutaghata. A pot is made out of gold, filled with jewels and 
donated. These different forms of donation are superior to all other forms of 
donation, and bring undying punya. 
EPILOGUE  
Lomaharshana completed his recital of the Matsya Purana. This text is 
exceedingly sacred. A person who reads even one chapter of the text goes to 
heaven and all his sins are forgiven. The sages thanked Lomaharshana and 
departed. 
Home   
  

1225 
 



16. VAYU PURANA  
LOMAHARSHANA AND THE OTHER SAGES  
King Adhisima Krishna (alternatively, Asima Krishna) ruled the earth well. 
During his reign, several sages organized a yajna (sacrifice) on the banks of the 
sacred river Drishadvati. The river flowed through the region that was known 
as Kurukshetra. 
The sacrifice went on for a very long time and the sage Lomaharshana came to 
visit the sages who were conducting the ceremony. Lomaharshana was so 
named because his recitals thrilled (harshana) the body-hair (loma) of his 
listeners. Lomaharshana was the disciple of the great sage Vedavyasa and had 
learnt the Puranas from his teacher. He was also well-versed in the Vedas and 
in the stories of the Mahabharata. As soon as Lomaharshana arrived, the 
other sages greeted him warmly. Lomaharshana greeted them in return. The 
assembled sages told Lomaharshana, ‘Great Suta, we are gratified that you 
have decided to grace our ceremony by your august presence. This is an 
auspicious occasion for telling us the stories of the Puranas. You have learnt 
them from the great Vedavyasa himself. Please recite the Puranas and slake 
our thirst for knowledge.’ Lomaharshana belonged to the suta class. A suta 
was the son of a kshatriya (the second of the four classes) mother. Looking 
after horses and acting as charioteers were occupations that were prescribed 
for sutas. In addition, they sung the glories of kings. The accounts of the 
Puranas state that sutas were first born when the great king Pirthu organized 
a yajna. They accordingly became raconteurs of the great deeds of Prithu, and 
thereafter, of all kings. They also recited the stories of the Puranas. 
‘I am a suta,’ replied Lomaharshana. ‘It is therefore my duty to recite the 
Puranas. You have asked me to do that which is my duty. I shall gladly accede 
to your request.’ The ancestors (pitri) had a daughter named Vasavi. She was 
cursed that she would be born as a fish. This fish had a daughter. The great 
Vedavyasa was born as Satyavati‘s son. Vedavyasa learnt the Vedas from the 
great sage Jatukarna. He also composed the Mahabharata and the Puranas. 

1226 
 



‘I have learnt the Puranas from Vedvyasa,’ continued Lomaharshana. ‘There 
were several sages who lived in the forest known as Naimisharanya. They 
requested the wind-God Vayu to tell them the answers to many questions. 
Vayu‘s replies constitute the Vayu Purana and this is the text that I shall recite 
for your benefit. It is the most sacred of all the Puranas and is full of wisdom.’ 
‘What is this business of Vayu reciting the Purana to the sages of 
Naimisharanya?’ asked the assembled sages. ‘We are not aware of it. Please 
tell us about it first.’ Lomaharshana complied. 
Naimisharanya forest is on the banks of the river Gomati. At a time when King 
Pururava used to rule the earth, many sages organized a yajna in 
Naimisharanya. The chief priest at this ceremony was Brihaspati, the 
preceptor of the Gods, and the ceremony went on for twelve long years. 
When the ceremony was over, the wind-God Vayu recited the Vayu Purana to 
the sages. In reciting the text, Lomaharashana began with the account of the 
creation. 
CREATION In the beginning, there was nothing in the universe. The Brahman 
(the divine essence) alone was everywhere. The Brahman had neither colour 
nor scent, it could not be felt or touched. It had no origin, no beginning or no 
end. The Brahman was constant and it was the origin of everything that was 
destined to be in the universe and the universe was shrouded in darkness. 
When it was time for creation to begin, the Brahman divided itself into three. 
The first part became Brahma, the creator of the universe. The second part 
was Vishnu, the preserver of the universe. And the third part was Shiva, the 
destroyer. 
At the time of creation, water appeared in the universe and the water was 
everywhere. In the water was created a golden (hiranya) egg (anda) that 
floated like a gigantic bubble. Brahma was born inside the egg. Since garbha 
means womb, Brahma came to be known as Hiranyagarbha. 
Since he effectively created (bhu) himself (svayam), he is also referred to as 
Svayambhu. 

1227 
 



Brahma had four faces. Also inside the egg were all the worlds (lokas) that 
would be created, in embryonic form. The earth was there, with its land, 
mountains, oceans and rivers. The moon, the sun, the stars and the planets 
were there. Also present were Gods, demons, humans and other living beings 
who would be created. This was the original creation of the universe (sarga). 
But at the end of one of Brahma‘s days, a minor destruction takes place. The 
universe is once again flooded with water during Brahma‘s night. Brahma, 
Vishnu and Shiva are not however destroyed. Each of Brahma‘s days is known 
as a kalpa (cycle). Thus, a minor destruction takes place at the end of every 
kalpa. When a new day dawns for Brahma, creation begins afresh. This 
periodical process of destruction (pralaya) and re-creation is known as 
pratisarga. The present kalpa is known as varaha kalpa. ‘Why is the present 
kalpa known as the varaha kalpa?’ asked the sages. Lomaharashana told them 
the story of Vishnu‘s boar (varaha) incarnation. 
VARAHA KALPA  
At the end of the last kalpa, there was a destruction and the universe was 
flooded with water. 
Vishnu slept on the water as long as Brahma‘s night lasted. Since nara means 
water and anyana means resting-place. Vishnu is accordingly known as 
Narayana. 
When Brahma‘s day dawned, he wished to embark on the process of 
creration. But where would the created beings live? There was no earth for 
them to live on. The earth had been submerged under the water. Vishnu 
therefore adopted the form of a huge boar (varaha). The boar‘s body was as 
large as a mountain and it had gigantic tusks that were exceedingly sharp. The 
eyes of the boar blazed like lightning and its roar thundered like the clouds. As 
a boar, Vishnu entered the water and began to search for the earth. He found 
the submerged earth and raised it up to its proper place on the tusks of the 
boar. The earth began to float on the water like a huge boat. 

1228 
 



Vishnu also levelled out parts of the earth. The mountains that had existed on 
earth in the earlier kalpa had been burnt down by the fire that raged at the 
time of the destruction. Vishnu created new mountains. Because they did not 
move (chala), the mountains came to be known as achala. 
And since they had layers (parva) or ranges, they came to be known as 
parvata. The land masses were also created. The creation of living beings 
could now begin. And since the creation of this kalpa took place after Vishnu‘s 
boar incarnation, the cycle came to be called varaha kalpa. 
Brahma created water, fire, air, the sky, directions, heaven, oceans, rivers, 
mountains and trees. 
He also created time, night and days. Through his mental powers, he created 
three sons named Sanandana, Sanaka, and Sanatana. In each kalpa, there are 
fourteen manvantaras (eras). Each manvantara is ruled over by a Manu. The 
Gods and the seven great sages (saptarshi) change from one manvantara to 
another. The title of Indra, king of the Gods, also changes hands. In any one 
particular manvantara, there are twenty-eight crores of Gods. Therefore, in 
fourteen manvantaras, there are three hundred and ninety-two crores of 
Gods. 
YUGAS  
There are roughly seventy-one mahayugas in a manvantara. A mahayuga lasts 
for twelve thousand years of the Gods and consists of four different eras or 
yugas - satya yuga or krita yuga, treta yuga, dvapara yuga, and kali yuga. Satya 
yuga lasts for four thousand years of the Gods treta yuga, dvapara yuga, and 
kali yuga. Satya yuga lasts for four thousand years of the Gods; treta yuga for 
three thousand; dvapara yuga for two thousand; and kali yuga for one 
thousand. This adds up to ten thousand years in a mahayuga. Another two 
thousand years are to be added for intervening periods (sandhymasha) 
between two yugas. Hence the total of twelve thousand years in a mahayuga. 
In satya yuga, winter, summer and monsoon were unknown. All individuals 
were equally handsome, equally prosperous and equally happy. There was no 

1229 
 



concept of dharma (righteousness) or adharma (evil) since people were 
naturally righteous. There were no prescribed places where people lived, 
there were no cities or villages. People lived freely on the shores of the oceans 
and in the mountains. Roots, fruits or flowers did not grow. People lived on 
juice that came out of the bowels of the earth. This juice was so miraculous 
that old age and disease were unknown. Hatred and envy did not exit. There 
was nothing to be envious about, since all individuals were equal. Moreover, 
people had the mental power to summon up whatever object they desired. 
There were no shortages. 
As one moved from satya yuga to treta yuga, these mental powers that people 
possessed disappeared. The primary obsession of individuals in satya yuga 
was meditation; in treta yuga it became knowledge. Thick clouds appeared in 
the sky and it began to rain. This rain fostered the growth of various trees. 
People started to live on the fruits of these trees. The trees also provided 
barks for clothing and honey. These trees were so wonderful that they were 
known as kalpavrikshas. That is, they provided whatever it was that one 
desired. But as treta yuga progressed, people became evil and started to fight 
over the possession of these trees. 
Consequently, the trees began to wither away. It was then that habitations 
started to be built, earlier there had been no fixed dwelling-places for 
humans. Such habitations were built on mountain and near rivers. Villages and 
cities were constructed. It also became necessary to have units of 
measurement. 
The smallest unit of measurement was an anguli (a finger). Ten angulis made 
one pradesha. This signified the length from the thumb to the extended index 
finger. The distance from the thumb to the extended middle finger was tata; 
from the thumb to the extended ring gokarna; and fromt eh thumb to the 
extended little finger vitasti. Thus, twelve angulis were equivalent to one 
vitasti. 
Twenty-one angulis made one ratni and twenty-four angulis made one hasta 
(hand). Forty-two angulis were called one kishku. Four hastas made one 

1230 
 



dhanu (bow-length); two thousand dhanus were one gavyuti; and four 
gavyutis constituted one yojana. Thus, one yojana was made up of eight 
thousand dhanus. The yojana was the basic unit for measuring the sizes of 
human habitations. 
The houses that men built were known as shalas. This is because they were 
modelled on trees. 
The branches of a tree (shakha) spread out in all directions. Since the houses 
spread out in this fashion, they were called shalas. The palaces were called 
prasada, the word signifying that these dwellings pleased the mind. The 
kalpavrikshas having disappeared, people had to look for means of 
sustenance. This they found in trees and herbs. In fact, the discovery of herbs 
goes back to treta yuga. 
But people became evil. They fought over the possessions of rivers, land, 
mountains, trees and herbs. Might became right and those who were strong 
managed to establish property rights. The weak suffered. The result of all this 
fighting was that the trees and the herbs disappeared and foodgrains grew no 
longer. The entire earth was swallowed up by thick forests. Suffering from 
hunger and thirst, people went to Brahma in search of a solution. Brahma 
milked the earth so that trees, herbs and foodgrains might grow afresh. To 
make sure that people did not fight again, Brahma laid down the precepts of 
righteous conduct. This was encapsulated in the principle of varnashrama 
dharma - the system of four varnas (classes) and four ashramas (stages of life). 
The principle of varnashrama dharma thus dates back to treta yuga and was 
enuciated by Brahma himself. 
People are divided into four varnas. The first class is that of Brahmanas. The 
Brahmanas are those who are knowledgeable in the true nature of the 
Brahman. Their primary occupations are performing sacrifices, studying and 
receiving alms. The second class consists of kshatriyas. 
Their primary duties are to bear arms so that they can protect the good and 
punish the evil. They must also rule and fight. The third class consists of 

1231 
 



vaishyas. The primary duties of vaishyas are agriculture, animal husbandry and 
trade. The fourth and final class is that of shudras. The shudras are to serve 
the other three classes and act as artisans. They are not permitted to study, 
perform sacrifices or donate alms. These are only permitted for the first three 
classes. A Brahmana who performs his duties well gets to live Brahma; such a 
kshatriya gets to live with Indra; such a vaishya with the Gods, the maruts; and 
such a shudra with the gandharvas (singers of heaven). 
Brahma also laid down the system of the four ashramas. The first one is 
Brahmacharya (celibate studenthood); the second garhasthya (householder 
stage); the third vanaprastha (forest-dwelling stage; and the fourth sannyasa 
(hermithood). In Brahmacharya stage, one has to study and serve one‘s 
teacher (guru) well. After this period is over, one is married and enters the 
householder stage. A householder has to perform sacrifices and serve his 
guests. 
Garhasthya is superior to the other three ashramas, since it is on the alms 
provided by householders that individuals in the other three stages of life 
subsist. When the householder stage is over and one has had sons, one enters 
vanaprastha. Such a person retires to the forest and lives on fruits and roots. 
It is only when the mind is completely detached from material pursuits that 
one moves on the the final stage of sannyasa. 
CREATION CONTINUED  
From his mental powers Brahma created ten sons. Their names were Bhrigu, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Angira, Marichi, Daksha, Atri, Vashishtha and Rudra. 
The first nine became sages and were known as the original Brahmanas. 
To ensure that creation progressed. Brahma divided his own body into two 
halves. The male half was known as Svayambhuva Manu and the female half 
was known as Shatarupa. These two married and had two sons named 
Priyavarata and Uttanapada. They also had two daughters named Akuti and 
Prasuti. 

1232 
 



Prasuti married Daksha and they had twenty-four daughters. These twenty-
four daughters became the mothers of all living beings. Thirteen of the 
daughters were married to Dharma. Of the remaining eleven daughters, Sati 
was married to Shiva (Rudra); Khyati to Bhrigu; Sambhuti to Marichi; Smriti to 
Angira; Priti to Pulastya; Kshama to Pulaha; Sannati to Kratu; Anasuya to Atri; 
Urjja to Vashishtha; Svaha to Agni; and Svadha to Agni; Svadha to the 
ancestors (pitris). Brahma told Shiva, ‘Why don‘t you create some beings?’ 
Shiva agreed with alacrity. But all the beings whom Shiva created were just 
like him in form. 
That is, they were immortal. 
‘What are you doing?’ exlaimed Brahma. ‘Don‘t create beings who are 
immortal. Create those that are mortal.’ ‘I will not create mortal beings,’ 
replied Shiva. 
‘Then stop creating.’ responded Brahma. ‘I will take care of creation myself.’ 
Shiva ceased to create. But the beings whom he had already created came to 
be known as the rudras. They were given rights to offering made at sacrifices, 
together with the other Gods. 
YOGA  
Shiva taught the world the technique of yoga. Yoga literally means union and 
is a form of meditation that teaches about the union between the individual 
human soul (atman) and the divine soul (paramatman). It is this knowledge 
that is strived for by those who meditate. And one who does not appreciate 
this union suffers from illusions. Yoga has five components. These are 
pranayama, dhyana, pratyahara, dharana and smarana. 
Pranayama signifies control over the breath of life. A lion or an elephant is a 
wild animal. But if lions or elephants are caught and tamed, they can be made 
to serve man‘s purpose. Exactly similarly, when the breath of life is controlled 
and mastered, an individual can use it to serve his own will. Pranayama must 
always be practised in a proper posture (asana). 

1233 
 



Pratyahara signifies the withdrawal of the senses from material attachments. 
The next step is dharana. One chooses the image that one is contemplating 
and fixes it in one‘s mind. In the process, it is best to concentrate on the tip of 
one‘s nose or at the centre of one‘s brows. When the image has been thus 
fixed, one can begin the actual process of meditation (dhyana). Yoga must 
however always be practised in a proper place and at a proper time. It must 
not be practised in the middle of the forest, near a fire, or at a place 
frequented by wild animals and insects. There must not be any noise to 
distract the practitioner. Nor must yoga be practised when one is hungry or 
thirsty, or in an unhappy state of mind. If these injuctions are not adhered to, 
yoga can bring great harm. It can lead to illness, dumbness, deafness, 
blindness and old age before the appointed time. But practised properly, yoga 
is a cure for various illnesses. 
When one is practising yoga, there are various disturbances and distractions 
that impede the progress towards the desired goals. These are known as 
upasargas. For example, one might become overly attached to relations, to 
becoming wealthy or to attaining heaven. Noises are heard, although there 
are no real noises at all. Demons, Gods and gandharvas are seen. All of these 
are illusions and have to be conquered. When the upasargas are successfully 
conquered, a practitioner of yoga attains various powers. These are known as 
aishvarya (wealth). There are eight of these powers. The first is known as 
anima. This enables the individual to obtain whatever object he desires from 
anywhere in the universe instantly. The second is known as laghima. This 
enables one to travel through the sky. The third power is prapti. By means of 
this, any object in the three worlds can be attained. The fourth power is called 
prakamya. This gives the individual the power to obtain all the wealth of the 
universe. The fifth power is called mahima. Through this power, one can be 
connected to any place or any object in the universe. 
The sixth power of ishitva gives one the capability to cause happiness or 
unhappiness anywhere in the three worlds. The seventh power is vashitva. 
This grants the power to control other living beings and all objects. The final 

1234 
 



power is known as kamavasayita. By means of this, the individual can travel 
freely at will. A person who attains these powers knows no birth, death, old 
age, illnesss, happiness or unhappiness. The senses mean nothing to him. Nor 
do material objects. His mind is fixed only on the Brahman. Everything else is 
unreal. 
DREAMS AND OMENS  
Dreams and omens help people to predict the future. A person who cannot 
see the Pole Star (Dhruva) or the Milky Way (Chhayapatha) will die within the 
space of a year. If the sun seems to be faded to you, you will not live for more 
than eleven months. A person who dreams of vomiting gold or silver is not 
destined to live for more than ten months. If one‘s footmarks on dust or mud 
are not complete, one will die within seven months. If a vulture, a crow, or a 
dove, alights on your head, that is a reason for sorrow. That means that you 
will die within six months. 
A person whose reflection is distorted, or a person who is suddenly 
surrounded by a cloud of dust, will live for four or five months at the most. If 
one sees lightning although there are no clouds in the sky, or if one sees a 
rainbow in the water, the indicated life span is merely of two or three months. 
If a person sees that his refection has a severed head, he will live for only one 
month. A person who reeks of the smell of dead bodies has but a fortnight to 
live. If you find that your feet are dry after taking a bath, that is a reason for 
great sorrow. That means that you will die within a space of ten day. The 
implications are the same if you find that smoke billows out of your head. A 
person whose thirst is never slaked, will die very soon. Death is also imminent 
for a dreamer who dreams of travelling southwards in a chariot drawn by 
bears or monkeys. The connotation is the same if one dreams of travelling 
southwards, accompanied by singing women dressed in black. Death is nigh if 
one dreams that one is wearing black clothes with holes in them. Ten days of 
life is all that is left if one dreams of ashes, coal, hair or dried rivers. It is a bad 
omen if jackals follow one around at the stroke of dawn. Death will come 
soon, as it will if your teeth chatter after having a bath. When a lamp is 

1235 
 



extinguished, a burn smell lingers in the air. If you cannot smell this, you will 
not live for long. Other bad omens which signal the end of life are the 
following; seeing a rainbow at night; failing to see one‘s own reflection in the 
pupil of another person‘s eye; continuous watering from one eye; a rough and 
blackened tongue; deafness; and blindness. There are several other bad 
omens. It is not the case that these bad dreams and bad omens cannot be 
countered. The best way to counteract their influence is to chant the mantra 
(incantation) om. 
KALPAS  
There was a sage named Savarni. He told the wind-gold Vayu, ‘We know that 
the present kalpa is called varaha kalpa. But how long is a kalpa? And what are 
the various other kalpas? Please tell us the answers to these questions.’ Vayu 
said the following. There are  4,320,000,000 years in a kalpa. Each kalpa is only 
one of Brahma‘s days and one thousand kalpas constitute one year for 
Brahma. Eight thousand such years constitute Brahma‘s yuga and one 
thousand of these yugas are called a savana. Two thousand savanas constitute 
a trivrita and this is the period of time for which Brahma lives. The kalpas since 
the original creation were as follows. 
(1) Bhava. 
(2) Bhuva. 
(3) Tapah. 
(4) Bhava. 
(5) Rambha. 
(6) Ritu. 
(7) Kratu. 
(8) Vahni. 
(9) Havyavahana. 
(10) Savitra. 

1236 
 



(11) Bhuvah. 
(12) Oushika. 
(13) Kushika. 
(14) Gandharva. 
(15) Rishabha. 
(16) Shadaja. 
(17) Marjaliya. 
(18) Madhyama. 
(19) Vairaja. The great Vairaja Manu was born in this kalpa and his son was the 
great sage Dadhichi. 
(20) Nishada. The race of nishadas (hunters) were created during this period. 
(21) Panchama. 
(22) Meghavahana. The word megha means cloud and vahana means to bear. 
In this kalpa, Vishnu adopted the form of a cloud and bore Shiva on his back. It 
is thus that the kalpa received its name. 
(23) Chintaka. 
(24) Akuti. 
(25) Vijnati. 
(26) Mana. 
(27) Bhava. 
(28) Vrihat. 
(29) Shvetalohita. 
(30) Rakta. 
(31) Pitavasa. 
(32) Sita. 
(33) Krishna 

1237 
 



(34) Vishvarupa. The Goddess Sarasvati appeared in this kalpa. 
In each dvapara yuga, a Vedavyasa is born. The Vayu Purana lists the names of 
the twenty-eight Vedavyases who have been born so far. 
BRAHMA, VISHNU AND SHIVA  
At the end of the last kalpa, there was a minor destruction and the world was 
flooded with water. 
Vishnu alone slept on this water, balanced on the hood of the great snake, 
Ananta. While Vishnu was thus sleeping, a lotus sprouted from his navel. It 
was a huge lotus and extended for a hundred yojanas. And it shone with 
radiance. Vishnu began to play with the lotus. While Vishnu was thus playing, 
Brahma arrived. ‘Who are you and why are you sleeping on this water?’ asked 
Brahma. ‘I am Vishnu and I am the Lord of everything.’ replied Vishnu. ‘But 
who are you and where are you going?’ ‘How can you be the Lord of 
everything?’ asked Brahma. ‘I am the Lord of everything that is in the 
universe. Everything that will be there in the universe is already there inside 
my stomach. If you don‘t believe me, why don‘t you enter my stomach and 
see for yourself?’ Vishnu‘s curiosity was stirred and he entered Brahma‘s 
stomach. Inside the stomach he was greatly surprised to find all the worlds 
that would be there in the universe. The mountains and the oceans were all 
there. So were all the living beings who would be created. Visnu spent one 
thousand years inside Brahma‘s stomach, marvelling at these wonders. But he 
could find neither the end nor the beginning of Brahma‘s stomach. He finally 
made his exit through Brahma‘s mouth. Vishnu told Brahma, ‘I bow down 
before you, you re indeed the Lord of everything. There are many marvels 
that I saw inside your stomach, many are the worlds that are there. But I can 
also rival you. Why don‘t you enter my stomach? I too can show you many 
worlds there.’ Brahma entered Vishnu‘s stomach and saw many worlds there, 
as Vishnu had promised. Brahma spent several years inside the stomach, but 
could find neither its end nor its beginning. Meanwhile, Vishnu had closed all 
the exits from his body and Brahma could find no way of coming out. He 
finally made his body very small and came out through Vishnu‘s navel. 

1238 
 



He clambered up the stalk of the lotus and seated himself on the lotus. Since a 
lotus is called padma and yoni means birth-place, Brahma came to be known 
as Padmayoni. 
While all this was going on, Shiva arrived on the scene. He held a trident in his 
hand. Such was the speed of Shiva‘s arrival that huge tidal waves were created 
in the water. Strong winds started to blow. ‘What is all this? Why are you 
shaking the lotus so and creating tidal waves?’ Brahma asked Vishnu. ‘Who 
speaks from my navel?’ said Vishnu. ‘Don‘t you remember?’ replied Brahma. ‘I 
am Brahama. You had entered my stomach and, thereafter I had entered your 
stomach. But you had closed all the exits, so that I had no way of getting out. 
In fact, I ought to be downright angry with you for treating me thus. I had to 
emerge through your navel and am now seated on the lotus.’ ‘I am sorry,’ said 
Vishnu. ‘I had not meant to insult you. I had only wished to play with you for a 
while. Let us now be friends. And as a token of your friendship, please grant 
me the boon that you will henceforth be known as my son.’ ‘I agree,’ replied 
Brahma. ‘At first, I thought that you were shaking the lotus and creating these 
tidal waves in the water. But now I see that there is another creature who is 
advancing towards us. His visage is terrible. He has ten arms and he holds a 
trident. Who is this demon?’ Vishnu told Brahma that this was none other 
than Shiva, the destroyer, and that the two of them should pray to Shiva. But 
Brahma flatly refused to do this. He would not acknowledge Shiva as a 
superior. Vishnu‘s persuasion however bore fruit and both Brahma and Vishnu 
started to pray to Shiva. ‘What can I do for you?’ asked Shiva. ‘What boon do 
you desire?’ ‘I am sorry that I doubted you,’ replied Brahma. ‘Please forgive 
me. And as a token of your pardon, please grant me the boon that you will be 
born as my son.’ Shiva gladly granted this boon. 
MADHU AND KAITABHA  
After Shiva had left, two brothers named Mahdu and Kaitabha appeared. They 
were demons. 
One of the demons wished to eat honey (madhu) as soon as he was born and 
thus came to be known as Madhu. The other demon looked like an insect 

1239 
 



(kita) and thus came to be known as Kaitabha. Madhu and Kaitabha wrought 
havoc. They destroyed the petals of the lotus. Next, they tried to eat up 
Brahma himself. Vishnu had gone back to sleep again and Brahma wake him 
up. 
‘Please rescue me from these demons,’ Brahma told Vishnu. Vishnu created 
two beings from his mouth. These were kown as Vishnu and Jishnu and Vishnu 
(the orignial one ) instructed them to destroy the demons. The being Vishnu 
killed Kaitabha and Jishnu killed Madhu. But it took a hundred years for the 
demons to be killed. The fat (meda) from the dead bodies of the demons 
formed the earth. That is the reason why the earth is known as medini. 
RUDRA  
You will remember that Shiva had granted Brahma the boon that he would be 
born as Brahma‘s son. To ensure that this indeed happened Brahma began to 
perform very difficult tapasya (meditation). But despite all this meditation, 
nothing happened. This failure greatly angered Brahma and he started to cry. 
As soon as these teardrops fell on the ground, poisonous snakes were born 
from the tears. This saddened Brahma even more, since unclean creatures had 
been born as a result of his tapasya. Brahama was so miserable that he fell 
down unconscious and died. As soon as Brahma died, eleven beings emerged 
from Brahma‘s body. They started to cry as soon as they emerged. The word 
rud means to cry and these beings came to be known as the rudras. The 
rudras revived Brahma. Brahma realized that Shiva had been born as his son in 
the form of these eleven rudras and was happy. 
Shiva had promised Brahman that he would be born as Brahma‘s son. To 
achieve this aim, Brahma started to meditate. While he was meditating, a son 
suddenly apppreared on his lap and began to cry. ‘Why are you crying?’ asked 
Brahma. ‘Because I do not have a name.’ Replied the boy. ‘I will give you a 
name,’ said Brahma. ‘Because you have cried, you will be known as as Rudra.’ 
But the boy continued to cry and it turned out that he wanted a second name. 
This went on for seven times. Rudra was according given the names Bhava, 
Shiva Pashupati, Isha, Bhima, Urgra and Mahadeva. 

1240 
 



‘Where will I live?’ asked Rudra. Brahma told him that in his eight different 
forms, he would live in the sun, the earth, the water, the fire, the air, the sky, 
the bodies of Brahmanas and the moon. The Descendants of Bhrigu The sage 
Bhrigu married Khyati, Daksha‘s daughter. Bhrigu and Khyati had two sons 
named Dhata and Vidhata. These two were Gods. Bhrigu and Khyati‘s 
daughter was Lakshmi, the Goddess of wealth and prosperity. Lakshmi was 
married to Vishnu. 
The descendants of the sage Bhrigu were known as the Bhargavas. One of 
these was the great sage Markandeya. The Vayu Purana also enumerates the 
descendants of the other sages. 
DAKSHA  
Daksha‘s daughter, Sati, was married to Shiva. Daksha was thus Shiva‘s father-
in-law. But, as a son-in-law. Shiva never showed Daksha adequate respect. Or 
so Daksha felt. For instance, Shiva never bowed down before Daksha. On one 
occasion, Daksha invited all his daughters to his house. The only one whom he 
did not invite was Sati, although Sati happened to be his eldest daughter. The 
reason behind Daksha‘s not inviting Sati was his hatred of Shiva. Sati however 
went to visit her father, although she had not been invited. And once she was 
there, Daksha ignored her and paid her no attention. ‘Father, why are you 
treating me thus?’ asked Sati. ‘I am, after all, your eldest daughter.’ ‘That may 
be,’ replied Daksha. ‘But consider your husband. He is far inferior to my other 
sons-in-law. All the others are great sages and show me respect. But your 
husband is a worthless fellow and is a perpetual thorn in my side. That is the 
reason I do not treat you with respect. 
Sati was aghast at these words. ‘My husband and I have not sinned,’ she told 
her father. ‘Yet you have insulted us both. I owe this body to you, since you 
happen to be my father. But I no longer wish to possess a body that owes its 
origin to you. I shall therefore give up this body. 
When I am born again, I will be remarried to Shiva.’ Having said this, Sati 
started to perform yoga. Such was the power ofher meditation that a fire 

1241 
 



emerged and burnt her physical body into ashes. Shiva learnt this tragic news 
and was furious. He came to Daksha‘s house and told Daksha, ‘For this sin, you 
will be born on earth. That is my curse on you. As for the sages who are your 
other sons-in-law, they too are cursed. ‘I don‘t care about your curses,’ replied 
Daksa. 
‘I will continue to defy you when I am born on earth. And I will instruct the 
sages that they are not to give you a share of the offerings that are made to 
Gods at sacrifices.’ Sati was reborn as Parvati, the daughter of Menaka 
(alternatively Mena) and Himavana (the Himalayas). She was remarried to 
Shiva. Because of Shiva‘s curse, Daksa was born on earth. He was born as the 
son of Marisha and the ten Prachetas. (The Prachetas were brothers who 
became sages and subsequently married the same woman, Marisha.) Daksha 
decided to organize an ashvamedha yajna (horse sacrifice). But due to his 
earlier enmity with Shiva, Daksha did not invite Shiva to this sacrifice. The 
sacrifice was being held in the foothills of the Himalayas, on the banks of the 
holy river Ganga. All the Gods and the sages had been invited to the sacrifice 
and went to the ceremony. The only exception was Shiva and his companions. 
There was a sage named Dadhicha (alternatively Dadhichi). He protested to 
Daksha that a sacrifice should not be held in Shiva‘s absence. Such a sanctity. 
But Daksha would not listen to Dadhicha. The sage therefore stated that he 
would not take any further part in the yajna. 
Moreover, he assured Daksha that the sacrifice was doomed to be a failure. 
Shiva and Parvati were seated on Mount Kailasa and they noticed all the 
vimanas (space vehicles) travelling through the sky, the Gods and their wives 
resplendently seated. ‘Where are all these Gods going?’ asked Parvati. 
‘Daksha is performing a yajna and they are all going to attend the sacrifice.’ 
replied Shiva. ‘Why have you not gone?’ demanded Parvati. ‘It must be that 
you have not been invited. But how is that possible? How can there be a 
sacrifice without you having been invited? You are superior to all the other 
Gods. Please do something to ensure that you do get your share of the 
offerings.’ Shiva thereupon created a demon from his mouth. The demon‘s 

1242 
 



name was Virabhadra. He had a thousand heads, a thousand arms and a 
thousand feet. Numerous were the weapons that he held in his hands. His 
fiery visage blazed like the sun itself and his form rose way up into the sky. 
Virabhadra bowed before Shiva and asked, ‘What are my orders?’ ‘Go and 
destroy Daksha‘s yajna,’ was the reply. Virabhadra left for the sacrifice. He 
created several other demons who would aid him in the task of destruction. 
Parvati also created a Goddess out of her own body to act as Virabhadra‘s 
companion. This Goddess was named Bhadrakali. This army trooped to 
Daksha‘s house and proceeded to destroy everything there. The mountains 
shook and trembled with their roars. The Gods and the sages who had come 
to attend the sacrifice did not known what could be done. They merely stood 
there and were thrashed. The offerings that had been piled up for the sacrifice 
were scattered here and there by Virabhadra and his companions. The 
scaffoldings that had been erected were smashed. Daksha tried to run away. 
But Virabhadra grabbed him and beheaded him with a slice of his sword. 
Brahma and the other Gods started to pray to Virabhadra and his companions. 
‘Who are you?‘ they asked. ‘Whoever you are , please be pacified. Please 
listen to our prayers and spare us.’ ‘Don‘t pray to me,’ replied Virabhadra. ‘I 
am merely an instrument of the great Shiva. If you must pray, pray to Shiva 
himself.’ The Gods and the sages started to pray to Shiva. Pleased by their 
prayers, Shiva appeared and set things right. He restored the surroundings to 
what they used to be before Virabhadra‘s destruction began. Shiva also 
revived Daksha and Daksha too started to pray to him. Shiva obtained his due 
respect. 
GEORGRAPHY  
Svayambhuva Manu had two sons named Priyavrata and Uttanapda. 
Priyavarata had a hundred sons. Ten of these were named Agnidhra, 
Vapushmana, Medha, Medhatithi, Vibhu, Jyotishmana, Dyutimana, Havya, 
Savana and Sarva. When Priyavrata decided to retire to the forest, he divided 
up his kingdom amongst seven of his sons. Since Priyavrata had ruled over the 
entire earth, this is how the earth came to be divided into seven regions 

1243 
 



(dvipas). Agnidhra inherited Jambuvipa, Medhatithi Plakshadvipa, 
Vapushmana Shalmalidvipa, Jyotishmana Kushadvipa, Dyutimana 
Krounchadvipa, Havya Shakadvipa and Savana Pushkaradvipa. Agnidhra, the 
ruler of Jambudvipa, had nine sons. Their names were Nabhi, Kimpurusha, 
Hari, Ilavrita, Ramya, Harinmana, Kuru, Bhadrashva and Ketumala. When it 
became time for Agnidhra to retire to the forest, he divided Jambudvipa 
amongst these nine sons. Nabhi inherited the region that lies to the south of 
the Himalayas. This is the region that subsequently came to be known as 
Bharatavarsha. 
(The word varsha signifies region.) Kimpurusha received Hemakutavarsha, 
Hari Naishadhvarsha, Ramya Nilavarsha, Harinmana Shvetavarsha, Bhadrashva 
Malyavanavarsha and Ketumala Gandhamadanavarsha. Ilvarita inherited the 
region around Mount Sumeru and Kuru the region to the north of Mount 
Shringavana. Nabhi had a son named Rishabha and Rishabha‘s son was 
Bharata. It was after Bharata that the region which Nabhi ruled over came to 
be known as Bharatavarsha. 
Mount Sumeru (alternatively Meru) is in Jambudvipa. This has a very high 
altitude and gold can be found in abundance there. The eastern slope of the 
peak is white and is associated with Brahmanas. The northern slope is red and 
is associated with kshatriyas. The southern slope is yellow and is associated 
with vaishyas. The western slope is greyish and is associated with shudras. You 
will remember that Brahma appeared from a lotus flower. Meru was formed 
out of the stalk of this flower. It is impossible to describe Mount Sumeru. The 
various sages who have attempted to describe it do not agree in their 
descriptions. This is because each sage saw, and thus described, only one part 
of the peak. The sage Atri described it as possessing a hundred angles; the 
sage Bhrigu maintained that it had a thousand angles; the sage Savarni 
thought it was octagonal; the sage Bhaguri‘s description suggests that it had 
the shape of a quadrilateral; the sage Varshayani maintained that it was as 
shapeless as the ocean; the sage Kroushtuki described it as circular; and the 

1244 
 



sage Gargya said that it had the shape of a woman‘s braided hair. It is only the 
great Brahma who can describe Mount Sumeru adequately. 
But it is known that there are many beautiful valleys in the region surrounding 
the peak. These valleys have ponds with limpid water and lotuses bloom in 
thousands in these ponds. There are also many places with bejewelled pillars 
and golden gates. There are landing strips where the vimanas (space vehicles) 
of the Gods can descend. Apart from the places, there are several hermitages 
frequented by the sages. But most wonderous of all is Brahma‘s famous 
assemblyhall, located atop Mount Sumeru. This assembly-hall is known as 
Manovati. The Vayu Purana now describes the mountans, rivers, ponds and 
valleys belonging to the different varshas. These we will gloss over and 
concentrate only on the description of Bharatavarsha. 
Bharatavarasha is bounded by the Himalayas to the north and by the ocean to 
the south. 
Bharatavarsha is divided into nine regions (dvipas). The names of these 
regions are Indradvipa, Kaserumana, Tamraparni, Gabhastimana, Nagadvipa, 
Soumya, Gandharva and Varuna. This adds up to eight . The ninth region is an 
island that is surrounded by the ocean on all sides. It is not very easy to travel 
from one region of Bharatavarsha to another. The transportation problems 
are enormous. The southern tip of Bharatavarsha is known as Kumarika (Cape 
Comorin or Kanyakumari). Beyond the boundaries of Bharatavarsha live the 
disbelievers (that is, those who disbelieve in the Vedas). To the east live the 
kiratas and to the west live the yavanas. 
Bharatavarsha proper is populated by Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and 
shudras. There are seven major mountain ranges in Bharatavarsha. These are 
known as Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Shaktimana, Riksha, Vindhya and 
Paripatra. There are several other minor ranges, amongst which are Mandara 
and Raviataka. 
Rivers abound in the region, owing their sources to the mountains. The rivers 
Ganga, Sindhu (Indus), Sarasvati, Shatadru (Sutlej), Chandrabhaga (Chenab), 

1245 
 



Yamuna, Sarayu, Iravati (Ravi), Vitasta, Vipasha (Beas), Devika, Kuhu, Gomati, 
Dhutapapa, Vahuda, Drishadvati, Koushiki, Tritiya, Gandaki, Nishchira, Ikshu 
and Lohita (Brahmaputra ) originate from the foothills of the Himalyas. The 
rivers Vedashruti, Vedavati, Vritraghni, Parnasha, Vandana, Satira, Mahati, 
Para, Charmanvati (Chambal), Vidisha, Vetravati, Shipra and Avanti originate 
out of the Paripatra range (This identifies the Paripatra as the Arvalli range.) 
The rivers Shona, Narmada, Mandakini, Dasharna, Chitrakuta, Tamasa, 
Pippala, Shroni, Karatoya, Pishachika, Nilotapa, Jambula, Valuvahini, Siteraja, 
Shuktimati, Makruna and Tridiva originate from the Riksha range. (This range 
thus seems to be the mountains around Chota Nagpur.) Tapi (Tapti), Payoshni, 
Nirvindhya, Bhadra, Nishadha, Venva, Vaitarani, Shitivahu, Kumudvati, Toya, 
Mahagouri, Durga and Antahshila are rives that owe their source in the 
Vindhya range. From the Sahya range there originate the rivers Godavari, 
Bhimarathi, Krishna, Veni, Vanjula, Tungabhadra, Suproyaga and Kaveri. (The 
Sahya range thus corresponds to the Western Ghats.) From the Malaya range 
originate the rivers Kritamala, Tamravarni, Pushapajati and Utpalavati. In the 
Mahendra range are found the sources of the rivers Trisama, Kratutulya, 
Ikshula, Tridiva, Langulini and Vamshadhara. The rivers Rishika, Sukumari, 
Mandaga, Mandavahini, Kupa and Palashini originate in the Shaktimana range. 
ASTRONOMY  
The earth is made up of five elements (bhuta). These are earth, wind sky, 
water and energy. 
There are seven regions in the underworld (patala). These are known as atala, 
sutala, vitala, gabhastala, mahatala, shritala and patala. The ground in atala is 
dark in colour; in sutala it is pale; vitala has ground that is red; in gabhastala 
the ground becomes yellow; in mahataka it is white; there are numerous 
stones and boulders in shritala; but in patala, the ground is laced with gold. 
Snakes and demons live in the underworld. Atala is ruled by the demon 
Namuchi; sutala by the demon Mahajambha; vitala by the demon Prahlada; 
gabhastala by the demon Kalanemi: mahatala by the demon Virochana; 
shritala by the demon Kesari; and patala by the demon Vali. 

1246 
 



The great snake Vasuki lives in shritala and the great snake Shesha lives in 
patala. (Vasuki is a king of the snakes (nagas). He was the son of Daksha‘s 
daughter Kadru and the sage Kashyapa. 
Usually, Vasuki and Shesha are regarded as synonymous, the name Ananta 
also being used.) The eyes of the snake Shesha are like red lotuses. His 
complexion is white and he wears blue is thousand hoods glow with radiance. 
Just as ther are seven lokas which consitiute the neither regions, there are 
seven lokas which constitute the upper regions. The universe consists of 
fourteen lokas. The seven loka which form the upper regions are named 
bhuloka, bhuvarloka, svaroka, maharloka, janaloka, tapaloka and satyaloka. 
The smallest unit of time is a nimesha, the time it takes of the eyes to blink. 
Fifteen nimeshas constitute a kashtha, thirty kashitas are a kala, thirty kalas 
make a muhurta and there are thirty muhurtas in the space of one night and 
one day (ahoratra). The thirty muhurtas in a day are divided into ten units, 
each unit consisting of three muhurtas. The unit that corresponds to the time 
of sunrise is known as prata (dawn). The next unit is called sangava 
(forenoon). Forenoon is followed by madhyahna (noon). Next come aparahna 
(afternoon) and sayahna (evening). These five units made up of fifteen 
muhurtas, form the day. There is an equal number of muhurtas in the night. 
This should not be taken to mean that day and night are always equal. 
Sometimes the day is longer than the night and sometimes the night is longer 
than the day. Day and night are equal twice a year. These two occasions are 
the precise midpoints of early autumn (sharat) and spring (vasanta). Fifteen 
days make up one paksha (fornight) and there are two pakshas in every masa 
(month). Two masas form a ritu (season) and three ritus are called an ayana. 
There are therefore two ayanas in every varha (year). The months Magha, 
Falguna, Chaitra, Vaishakha, Jyaishtha and Ashada are referred to as 
uttarayana. Correspondingly, the months Shravana, Bhadra, Ashvina, Kartika, 
Agrahayan and Pousha are referred to as dakshinayana. 
Svayambhuva Manu had two sons named Uttanapada and Priyavrata. 
Priyavrata‘s descendants have already been mentioned. Uttanapada had a son 

1247 
 



named Dhruva. Dhruva pleased Vishnu through his tapasya and obtained the 
boon that a place would be reserved for him in the sky. 
Dhruva became the Pole Star. This is in the constellation of Shishumara (Ursa 
Minoris or the Little Bear). The moon, the sun, the planets and the stars, all 
revolve around Dhruva. 
The sun‘s chariot is made of gold and is drawn by seven horses. These horses 
are named Gayatri, Trishtupa, Anushtupa, Jagati, Pamkti, Vrihati and Ushnika. 
There are twelve adityas. In each month, two adityas, two sages. Two 
gandharvas, two apsaras and two rakshasa (demons) ride on the sun‘s chariot 
together with the sun. This is as follows. (i) The months Chaitra and Vaishakha 
- the adityas Dhata and Aryama; the sages Pulastya and Pulaha; the 
gandharvas Tumburu and Narada; the apsaras Kratushthala and 
Ppunjikasthala; and the rakshasas Heti and Praheti. (ii) The months Jyaishtha 
and Ashada - the adityas Mitra and Varuna; the sages Atri and Vashishtha; the 
gandharvas Haha and Huhu; the apsaras Menaka and Sahajanya; and the 
rakshasas Pourusheya and Vadha. (iii) The months Shravana and Bhadra - the 
adityas Indra and Vivasvana; the sages Angira and Bhrigu; the gandharvas 
Vishvavasu and Ugrasena; the apsaras Promlacha and Nimlocha; and the 
rakshasa Vyaghra and Shveta. (iv) The months Ashvina and Kartika - the 
adityas Parjanaya and Pusha; the sages Bharadvaja and Goutama, the 
gandharvas Vishvavasu and Surabhi; the apsaras Vishvachi and Ghritachi; and 
the rakshasas Apa and Vata. (v) The months Agrahayana and Pousha - the 
adityas Amsha and Bhaga; the sages Kashyapa and Ritu; the gandharvas 
Chitrasena and Urnayu; the apsaras Urvashi and Viprachitti; and the rakshasas 
Vidyut and Sfurjja. (vi) The months Magha and Falguna - the adityas Tvashta 
and Jishnu; the sages Jamadagni and Vishvamitra; the gandharvas 
Dhritarashtra and Suryavarcha; the apsaras Tilottama and Rambha; and the 
rakshasas Brahmopeta and Yajnopeta. 
The moon‘s chariot is drawn by ten horses. These horses are named Yayu, 
Trimana, Vrisha, Raji, Bala, Vasa, Turanya, Hamsa, Vyomi and Mriga. Budha‘s 

1248 
 



(Mercy) chariot is drawn by eight horses; Shukra‘s (Venus) by ten; Mangala‘s 
(Mars) by eight; and Brihaspati‘s (Jupiter) and Shani‘s (Saturn) also by eight. 
SHIVA’S BLUE THROAT  
Many years ago, in satya yuga, the sage Vashishtha met Kartikeya, the son of 
Shiva and Parvati. 
Having worshipped Kartikeya, the sage said, ‘Please tell me how Shiva‘s throat 
came to be blue.’ ‘I do know the answer and I will satisfy your curiosity,’ 
replied Kartikeya. ‘I was once on Mount Kailasa, sleeping on my mother‘s lap. I 
heard my mother, Parvati, asked my father how his throat came to blue. And I 
will relate to you Shiva‘s reply. The Gods and the demons once got together 
and decided to churn the ocean (samudra manthana). The Gods and the 
demons were desirous of obtaining the amrita (a life-giving drink) that was 
expected to emerge as a result of the churning of the ocean. But when the 
churning began, some terrible poison came out and the Gods and the demons 
were despondent at the sight of this poison, since they thought that it would 
destroy them all. They therefore fled to Brahma for protection. 
‘Why are you so despondent?’ asked Brahma. ‘A terrible poison named 
kalakuta has emerged as a result of the churning of the ocean; replied the 
Gods and the demons. ‘It is threatening to destroy the entire universe. It has 
even turned the great Vishnu‘s complexion black.’ ‘The only solution is to pray 
to Shiva,’ said Brahma. ‘He alone can deliver us from the effects of this terrible 
poison.’ Brahma and the other Gods started to pray to Shiva. Shiva was 
pleased at these prayers and appeared. He swallowed up the poison. But such 
was the strength of the poison that it made Shiva‘s throat blue. The word nila 
means blue and kantha means throat. Since Shiva became blue of throat, ever 
since that day, he has been known as Nilakantha. 
VEDAVYASA  
The sages requested Lomaharshana, ‘Please tell us how the sacred Vedas 
came to be divided.’ Lomaharshana recounted the following story. When 
dvapara yuga arrived, Brahma noticed that people were becoming evil and 

1249 
 



were no longer paying sufficient attention to the Vedas. They were gradually 
Deviating from the righteous path. Brahama decided that the Vedas needed to 
be divided so that their wisdom might be disseminated amongst people. 
Brahma accordingly instructed Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa to divide the 
Vedas into four parts. Vedavyasa had five disciples. These were Jaimini, 
Sumantu, Vasihampayana, Paila and Lomaharshana. The four parts into which 
the Vedas were divided were known as the Rig Veda, the Sama Veda, the 
Yajur Veda and the Atharva Veda. Paila was taught the Rig Veda, Jaimini the 
Sama Veda, the Yajur Veda and Sumantu the Atharva Veda. ‘As for me.’ 
continued Lomaharshana, ‘the great Vedavyasa taught me the Puranas.’ Paila 
passed on what he had learnt to the sages Indrapramti and Vashkali. They 
were Paila‘s disciples. Indrapramati‘s disciple was Markandeya. From 
Markandeya the knowledge passed successively to Satyashrava, Satyashita, 
Satyarata and Satyashri. Satyashri had three disciples named Shakalya, 
Rathitara and Bharadvaja. ‘Shakalya was so proud that his vanity led to his 
destruction at the time of King Janaka‘s horse sacrifice,’ said Lomaharshana. 
‘We don‘t know the story,’ responded the sages. ‘What is this horse sacrifice 
that you are talking about? Please tell us the story.’ This is the story that 
Lomaharshana told. King Janaka organized an ashvamedha yajna (horse 
sacrifice). People came from far and near to attend the ceremony and 
numerous were the sages who graced the occasion with their presences. King 
Janaka began to wonder if there was any way of finding out who was the best 
among all the assembled sages. He Devised a plan. Janaka decided to donate a 
thousand head of cattle, a thousand gold pieces, many villages and several 
servants. He then told the sages, ‘I have gathered all these rices as a tribute to 
knowledge. But I am unable to decide who amongst you is the most learned. 
Why don‘t decide for yourselves? Let the person who is the most superior 
among you claim all this wealth for himself.’ Hearing this, the sages started to 
fight and argue. 
Each wanted the wealth for himself. Therefore, each sage maintained that he 
was superior to all the others. Amongst the sages was the great sage 

1250 
 



Yajnavalkya and Yajnavalkya told his disciple, ‘Take all this wealth to my home. 
I am the most learned amongst the sages. I have studied the Vedas really well. 
I will debate with anyone who dares to challenge me and establish my 
supremacy. The other sages were naturally not at all pleased to hear these 
words and they began to debate with Yajnavalkya. Even though all the sages 
combined against Yajnavalkya, they were no match for him and Yajnavalkya 
easily defeated them. Yajnavalkya then addressed the sage Shakalya. 
‘What about you, Shakalya?’ he asked. ‘Why have you kept quiet? I know that 
you are full of vanity about your learning. What about debating with me?’ ‘It is 
you who are proud and vain,’ retorted Shakalya. ‘I will bring you down a peg 
or two. I am certainly going to debate with you.’ The debate started. Shakalya 
asked Yajnavalkya more than a thousand questions, but Yajnavalkya provided 
the right answers to all of these questions. He then told Shakalya, ‘I will ask 
you a single question. If you cannot give me the right answer. I curse you that 
you will die. 
Shakalya did not know the answer to the question that Yajnavalkya asked. He 
therefore died. But prior to these events having taken place , Shakalya had 
composed five sacred texts known as Samhitas. And he had taught these to 
his disciples Mudgala, Goloka, Khaliya, Matsya and Shaishireya. 
Lomaharshana coninued with Yajnavalkya‘s story. Vedavyasa taught the 
Yajnavalkya‘s story. 
Vedavyasa taught the Yajur Veda to Vaishampayana. Vaishampayana 
composed sixty-six samhitas and taught them to his disciples. These disciples 
came to be known as the charakas. 
‘Why did these disciples come to be known as the charakas?’ the sages asked 
Lomaharshana. 
Lomaharshana recited the following story. There was an occasion when an 
important religious rite had to be performed. All the sages agreed to meet on 
Mount Sumeru so that they might decide on the modus operandi for 
observing this religious rite. It was also agreed that any sage who failed to 

1251 
 



attend the assembly on Mount Sumeru would be regarded as guilty of having 
committed a sin. And the sin would be equivalent in severity to the sin 
committed from killing a Brahmana. 
For various reasons, Vaishampyana could not attend the assembly. For a sin 
that was equivalent to the sin committed in killing a Brahmana. 
Vaishampayana had to perform severe penance. This involved the observance 
of a difficult religious rite (vrate). Vaishampayana told all his disciples, ‘Please 
help me in the observance of this difficult vrata.’ Amongst Vaishampayana‘s 
disciples was Yajnavalkya. Yajnavalkya said, ‘Why are you bothering all these 
disciples? My powers of tapasya are such that I alone can perform what is 
required. Vaishampayana regarded this as unwarranted vanity on his disciple‘s 
part. He therefore told Yajnavalkya that he no longer wished to have 
Yajnavalkya as a disciple. Yajnavalkya should also return whatever it was that 
he had learnt from Vaishampayana. Yajnavalkya therefore vomited out his 
knowledge of the Yajur Veda. 
To re-acquire the knowledge of the Vedas, Yajnavalkya started to meditate. 
He prayed to the sun-God, Surya. From Surya, Yajnavalkya came to acquried 
knowledge of the Yajur Veda. 
Yajnavalkya taught this knowledge of the Yajur Veda. (Shuka Yajur Veda.) 
Yajnavalkya taught this knowledge to fifteen of his disciples. These disciples 
were named Kanva, Vaidheyashali, Madhyandina, Shapeyi, Vidigdha, Apya, 
Uddala, Tamrayana, Vatsya, Galava, Shaishiri, Atavi, Eni, Virani and 
Saparayana. Why were Vaishampana‘s disciples known as the charakas? The 
word acharana means act. Since Vaishampayana had committed an act that 
was the equivalent of killing a Brahmana, his disciples came to be named 
Charakas. 
Lomaharashana also told the sages that he himself had taught the Puranas to 
six of his disciple. 
These disciples were Sumati, Akritavrana, Bharadvaja, Mitrayu, Savarni, and 
Susharma. 

1252 
 



MANVANTARAS  
Lomaharshana next told the sages about the various manvantara (eras). Each 
of Brahma‘s days is referred to as a kalpa (cycle) and that there are fourteen 
manvantaras in each kalp. Each manvantara is ruled over by a Manu and lasts 
for a duration of  30,67,20,000 years. The Gods, the seven great sages and the 
individual who holds the title of Indra change from one manvantara to 
another. In the present kalpa, six manvantaras have already passed. The first 
Manu was Svayambhuva. The second Manu was Svarochisha. The Gods then 
were the tushitas and the paravatas, and there were twenty-four such Gods. 
Vaidha ruled as Indra then and the seven great sages were Urjja, Stambha, 
Kashyapa, Bhargava, Drona, Rishabha and Angira. The third Manu was 
Outtama. The Gods then were the sudhamanas, the devas, the pratardanas, 
the satyas and the shivas. The fourth Manu wa Tamasa. The Gods of this 
manvantara were the satyas, the svarupas, the sudhis and the haris. Shibi held 
the title of Indra then, and the names of the seven great sages were Kavya, 
Harsha, Kashyapa, Prithu, Atreya, Agni and Jyotirdhama. The fifth Manu was 
Raivata. The names of Gods of this era were the vipras, the amritias, the 
supatis and various others. The Indra of this period was Vibhu and the seven 
great sages were Poulastya, Vedavahu, Yajuh, Hiranyaroma, Vedashri, 
Bhargava and Urddhavahu. The sixth Manu was Chakshusha. 
The Gods then was the adyas, prasutas, the bhavyas, the prithukas and the 
lekhas. Manojava held the title of Indra and the seven great sages were 
Havirdhana, Sudhama, Vashishtha,Viraja, Poulastya, Poulaha and 
Madhuratreya. The present Manu is known as Vaivasvata and this is the 
seventh manvantara of the present kalpa. The Gods of this era are the adityas, 
the vasus, the rudras, the sadhyas and the vishvadevas. The title of Indra is 
held by Purandara and the seven great sages are Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, 
Bharadvaja, Sharadvata, Goutama, Atri, Vasumana, and Vatsari. There will be 
seven more manvantaras in the future before the universe is destroyed. 
The eighth Manu will be Savarni. The seven great sages then will be Galava, 
Bhargava, Dvaipayna, Kripa, Diptimana, Rishyashringa and Ashvatthama. The 

1253 
 



Gods will be the amitabhas, the sutapas and the sukhas, and the title of Indra 
will be bestowed on Vali, the son of Virochana. 
The ninth Manu will be Merusavarani or Dakshasavarni. Adbhuta will hold the 
title of Indra then. The seven great sages will be Skanda, Medhatithi, Vasu, 
Jyotishmana, Dyutimana, Havyavahana, Sutapa and Vasita. The tenth Manu 
will be Dharmasavarni. The Gods then will be the sukhamanas and the 
viruddhas. The title of Indra will be held by Shanti and the seven great sages 
will be Havishmana, Sukirti. Atri, Apamurti, Pratipa, Nabhaga and Abhimanyu. 
The eleventh Manu will be Bhavasavarni (alternatively known as 
Rudrasavarni). The Gods then will be the nirmanaratis, the kamajas and the 
manojavas. The seven great sages will be Havishmana. 
Vapushamana, Varnui, Bhaga, Pushti, Nishchara and Agniteja and Vrisha will 
hold the title of Indra. The twelfth Manu will be Ritasavarni. The Gods then 
will be the haritas, the rohitas, the sumanas, the sukarmas and the suparas. 
The title of Indra will vest with Ritadhama and the seven great sages will be 
Kriti, Sutapa, Tapomurti, Tapasvi, Taposhayana, Taporati, and Tapomati. The 
thirteenth Manu will be Rouchya. The sutramas, the sudharmas and the 
sukarmas will be the Gods then. Divaspati will be the Indra and the seven 
great sages will be Dhritimana, Pathyavana, Tattvadarshi, Nirutsaka, 
Nishprakampa, Nirmoha and Svarupa. The fourteenth and final Manu will be 
Bhoutya. 
VENA AND PRITHU  
The sixth Manu was Chakshusha. One of Chakshusha‘s descendants was the 
great king Pirthu, the son of Vena. Chakshusha had a son named Uru and Uru 
had a son named Anga. Agna maried Sunitha, and they had a son named 
Vena. Vena was evil and when he became the king, he started to oppress the 
world and his subjects. The sages had no option but to kill Vena. The sages 
then began to knead Vena‘s dead body. When the right arm of the dead body 
was kneaded, Prithu was born. He emerged fully grown and with a bow and 
several arrows held in this hand. He as also dressed in invincible armour. Such 
was Prithu‘s radiance that he blazed like the flaming sun. 

1254 
 



The sages interrupted Lomaharshana. ‘How came Vena to be evil?’ they 
asked. ‘And if Vena was evil, why wasn‘t Prithu evil as well?’ they asked. 
Vena‘s mother was Sunitha and Sunitha was the daughter of Mrityu was really 
evil. Right from his birth, Vena tended to associate with this maternal 
grandfather and thus picked up evil ways. He stopped believing in the Vedas . 
In fact, when he become king, Vena instructed that all yajnas should cease in 
his kingdom. There was no need to pray to the Gods. The only person who 
was deserving of worship was Vena himself. The sages tried to persuade Vena 
to give up his evil ways and bring him back to the righteous path, but Vena 
refused to listen. It was then that the sages slew Vena. 
But Vena had no son. Who would be king in his place? There had to be a king, 
otherwise the kingdom would degenerate into anarchy. To obtain a son, the 
sages started to knead the dead body. When the left arm was kneaded, a 
dwarf was born as a result of the kneading. The dwarf was dark in complexion 
and exceedingly ugly. ‘Sit,’ the sages told the dwarf, ‘nishida.’ (The word 
nishida means ‗to sit‘). All the evil that was in Vena‘s body went into the body 
of the dwarf and the dead body was cleansed of all evil. The dwarf came to 
acquire the name of nishada from the word nishida. His descendants were 
also known by the same name and became a race of hunters and fishermen. 
They lived in the Vindhya mountains. Thus, when the dead body was kneaded 
again, there was no more evil left and Prithu came to be righteous. The word 
prithu means plump. Since Vena‘s right palm was fairly plump and since 
Vena‘s son was born when the right palm was kneaded, the son acquired the 
name of Prithu. The sages arranged for Prithu‘s coronation. The waters of all 
the rivers and all the oceans were brought for this ceremony. All the Gods 
graced the occasion by their presence. Thus it was that Prithu came to rule 
over the entire earth. He ruled well and his subjects prospered. The earth 
yielded an abundant supply or foodgrains. The cows were full of milk. 
It was at the time that Brahma organised a yajna. Two classes of people 
known as the sutas and the magadhas were born from this yajna. They were 
actually cross-breeds. The sutas were, for example, the offspring of kshatriya 

1255 
 



fathers and Brahmana mothers. The sages asked the sutas and the magadhas 
to compose and sing songs in praise of the great king Prithu. Even since that 
day, the sutas and the magadhas became raconteurs who sung songs in praise 
of kings. The sutas were asked to live in the region known a Anupa and the 
magadhas in the region known as Magadha. However, Prithu‘s subjects still 
did not possess any specific occupations. They therefore went to their king 
and said, ‘Please tell us how we may make a living.’ To achieve this end, Prithu 
decided to level out the earth. But the earth was scared and, adopting the 
form of a cow, started to flee. This angered Prithu and he pursued the earth 
with his bow in his hand. Wherever in the three worlds the earth fled to. 
Prithu followed. He was determined to kill the earth. 
Finally, the earth sought refuge with Prithu himself. ‘Please do not kill me,’ she 
said. ‘I am a woman and killing a woman is a crime. Besides, if you kill me, how 
will your subjects make a living? I have a better idea. I have adopted the form 
of cow. Milk me instead and your objective will be attained.’ Prithu did what 
the earth had asked him to. He milked the earth. As a result of this milking, 
seeds of foodgrains emerged and people could make a living out of these. 
Prithu also used his bow to level out the earth. Villages and cities could now 
be built in the plains. Earlier, these had been unknown. Agriculture, animal 
husbandry and trade had also been unknown earlier. 
It was after Prithu that the earth came to be known as prithivi. This milking of 
the earth was in addition to the original milking of the earth that Brahma had 
performed. In fact, the earth was milked once in every manvantara. 
THE PRACHETAS  
Prithu had a son named Antardhana and Antardhana‘s son was Havirdhana. 
Havirdhana‘s son was Prachivarhi. Prachinavarhi married Savarna, the 
daughter of the ocean. Prachinavarhi and Savarna had ten sons known as the 
Prachetas. 
The Prachetas were interested in meditating. They performed tapasya for 
thousands of years under the oceans. They were actually supposed to rule the 

1256 
 



earth. As long as the Prachetas meditated, they did not rule. The earth 
became dense with forests. Trees grew everywhere and so dense was the 
growth that the wind could not blow. For the ten thousand years that the 
Prachetas meditated, their subjects suffered. 
The news of this mishap eventually reached the Prachetas and their anger was 
roused. Such was the fury of their anger that flames issued from their mouths 
and burnt up all the trees. Soma was the God of the trees. When Soma saw 
that all the trees were being burnt up, he tried to pacify the Prachetas. 
‘Please restarin your anger,’ he said. ‘It is time for you to devote attention to 
getting married and having children so that the world might be populated. I 
have with me a woman named Marisha, a daughter of the trees. Please accept 
her as your wife.’ The ten Parchetas married Marisha and a son named Daksha 
was born. 
DAKSHA’S DESCENDANTS 
Daksha‘s descendants have already been mentioned in the section on 
creation. The Vayu Purana now gives an account which is, in certain respects, 
contradictory to the earlier account. 
Daksha married Asikli, the daughter of Virana, Daksha and Asikli had a 
thousand sons named the Haryashva. But the sage Narada persuaded the 
Haryashvas that there was nothing to be gained by being interested in the 
material world. These sons therefore forsook the world and went away to 
meditate. Daksha and Asikli then had another thousand sons known as the 
Shavalshvas. But Narada persuaded these sons also to go away and meditate. 
Thereafter, Daksha and Asikli had sixty daughters. Ten of these daughters 
were married to Dharma. Twenty-seven daughters were married to the moon-
God, Chandra. These were the twenty-seven nakshatras (stars). Their names 
were Ashvini, Bharani, Krittika, Pushya, Ashlesha, Punarvasu, Purvafalguni, 
Uttarafalguni, Magha, Hasta, Chitra, Svati, Jyestha, Vishakha, Anuradha, Mula, 
Purvashada, Uttarashada, Shravana, Uttarabhadrapada, Revati, Rohini, 
Mrigashira, and Ardra. 

1257 
 



Fourteen of Daksha‘s daughters were married to the sage Kashyapa and all 
living beings in the universe are descended from Kashyapa. The daughters 
who were married to Kashyapa were named Aditi, Diti, Danu, Khasa, Arishta, 
Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krosdhavasha, Ira, Kadru, and Muni. 
Aditi had twelve sons known as the adityas. These were the Gods. 
Surabhi pleased Shiva with her tapasya and obtained the eleven rudras as her 
children. She was also the mother of all horses, cows, buffaloes and other 
quadruped animals. 
DITI’S CHILDREN  
Diti‘s sons were known as the daityas (demons). Diti originally had two sons 
named Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha. Hiranyakashipu was the elder. 
Kashyapa once organized an ashvamedha yajna (horse sacrifice). All the Gods 
and the sages came to attend this sacrifice. A golden throne had been 
prepared for the chief priest. Diti was also present on the occasion then. She 
had, at the time, been bearing a baby for ten thousand years in her womb. 
When all arrangements had been made for the sacrifice, the baby was born. 
The newly born baby ascended the throne reserved for the chief priest and 
immediately began to recite the Vedas. It was this baby who came to be 
known as Hiranyakashipu. 
Hiranyakashipu hung upside down for one lakh years and prayed to Brahma. 
Through this period, he fasted. This act of tapasya so pleased Brahma that he 
granted Hiranyakashipu a boon whereby the demon became invincible. Thus 
fortified, Hiranyakashipu started to oppress the world. He drove the Gods out 
of heaven. Hiranyakashipu was eventually killed by Vishnu in his narasimha 
(half-man half-lion) incarnation. Hiranyakashipu had four sons named 
Prabhlada, Anuhlada, Samhlada and Hlada. Hlada‘s son was Sunda and 
Sunda‘s wife was Tadaka. It was this Tadaka whom Rama (in the Ramayana) 
killed. Tadaka‘s son was Muka. Muka was killed by Arjuna (in the 
Mahabharata). 

1258 
 



Prahlada‘s son was Virochana and Virochana‘s son was Vali. Vali was defeated 
by Vishnu in his vamana (dwarf) incarnation. Vali had a son named Vana. 
As for Hiranyakashipu‘s brother Hiranyaksha, he had five sons. They were 
named Utkara, Shakuni, Kalanabha, Mahanabha and Bhutasantapan. 
Hiranyaksha was killed by Vishnu in his varaha (boar) incarnation. 
Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha had a sister named Simhika. 
Diti noticed that her sons and their descendants were suffering at the hands 
of the Gods, often with the connivance of Vishnu. She therefore did her best 
to please her husband Kashyapa. 
Kashyapa was eventually satisfied and agreed to grant Diti a boon. 
‘Please grant me the boon that I may have a son who will kill Indra.’ said Diti. 
This was slightly awkward for Kashyapa. The Gods were also his sons, from his 
other wife Aditi. 
He told Diti that she would have to observe cleanliness for a hundred years. If 
she succeeded in doing this, she would indeed give birth to a son who would 
slay Indra. But if she failed, the son would become Indra‘s friend and 
companion. This condition Diti accepted. 
Diti started to perform tapasya so that she might have the son she wanted. 
But Indra had got to know about what Diti was after. He hung around the 
hermitage, helping his aunt by fetching fruits, roots and wood from the forest. 
But this attempt at aiding his aunt was merely a pretext. 
Indra was the lookout for some unclean act that Diti might commit. 
Ninety-nine of the hundred appointed years passed. 
It was then that Diti made her first mistake. She was so tired that she fell 
asleep, resting her head on her thighs. In the process, her hair touched her 
feet. This was an unclean act. In a flash, Indra seized his opportunity. Now that 
Diti had committed an unclean act, he could freely enter her body. He entered 
Diti‘s womb and found the baby there. Indra possessed a weapon known as 
the vajra. With the vajra, Indra sliced up the baby into seven parts. 

1259 
 



The parts began to cry and Indra said, ‘ma ruda,’ which means, ‘don‘t cry.’ But 
the parts continued to cry and Indra carved up each of the parts into seven 
more sections. 
There were thus forty-nine parts in all. 
Meanwhile, Diti had woken up and she begged Indra not to kill her sons. Indra 
agreed. The sons were born. Because of the words indra had uttered, they 
came to be known as the maruts. Thanks to Kashyapa‘s boon, they became 
friends and constant companions of Indra. They were elevated to the status of 
Gods.  
KASHYAPA’S OTHER CHILDREN  
What of Kashyapa‘s wife Danu? Her sons came to be known as the danavas 
(demons). Muni gave birth to the gandharvas (singers of heaven) and apsaras 
(dancers of heaven). Vinata had two sons named Aruna and Garuda. Their 
sisters were the mothers of all the birds. Kadru gave birth to the snakes 
(nagas). Chief among them were Shesha, Vasuki and Takshaka. Khasa gave 
birth to sons. These sons were exceedingly ugly. The yakshas (demi-Gods who 
were companions of the God Kubera) were descended from the elder brother 
and the rakshasas (demons) were descended from the younger brother. 
Surasa‘s sons were other rakshasas. Ira was the mother of all trees and herbs. 
Krodhavasha gave birth to the ghosts (pishachas). Tamra‘s children were wild 
animals. 
THE ANCESTORS ‘ 
Who are the ancestors?’ asked the sages. 
Lomaharshana recounted the following story. When Brahma first started to 
created, the Gods were born. These Gods not only did not worship Brahma, 
they started to create themselves. 
Brahma therefore cursed them that they would become ignorant. The Gods 
did not relish this idea, they therefore tried to pacify Brahma. 

1260 
 



‘You will have to perform penance for your sins.’ said Brahma. ‘As for the 
means of penance, why don‘t you ask the beings whom you have created? 
They will instruct you in the ways of wisdom.’ The sons accordingly instructed 
the fathers. A person who instructs is known as a father (pita). 
The sons of the Gods according became like the fathers of the Gods and are 
revered as the ancestors (pitris). It is these pitris who are given offerings at the 
time of shraddha (funeral) ceremonies. In general, the pitris also include dead 
ancestors and the ten prajapatis who rule over the universe. 
The ancestors had a daughter named Mena who was married to Himavana 
(the Himalayas). 
Mena (alternatively Menaka) and Himavana had three daughters named 
Aparna, Ekaparna, and Ekapatala. 
These three daughters meditated for two thousand years. Ekapatala 
meditated under a snakegourd (patala) tree. Each day, she ate only one (eka) 
snake-gourd. It was thus that she came to acquire the name of Ekapatala. The 
word parna means leaf. Ekaparna ate only one leaf every day and thus 
acquired her name. Aparna ate nothing at all. Since she did not eat even a 
leaf, she came to be known as Aparna. Aparna was also known as Uma. And 
even as Parvati, since she was the daughter of the mountain (parvata) 
Himavana. 
Parvati was married to Shiva. Their son was Skanda or Kumara. Skanda got 
separated from his parents and was brought up by the Krittikas (Goddesses or 
nakshatras). He therefore obtained the name of Kartikeya. 
THE SOLAR LINE 
The sun-God Surya was born as the son of Kashyapa and Aditi. Surya was born 
as an egg (anda). 
For days on end, nothing happened to the egg and the shell did not crack. 
Vishvakarma was the architect of the Gods. When Vishvakarma found that 
nothing was happening to the egg, he cracked it open with a blow. Kashyapa 
was initially alarmed at this act, since he thought that the son who was inside 

1261 
 



the egg might have died. But he soon discovered that this was not the case 
and remarked, ‘the egg (anda) has not died.’ From this expression, the son 
who was born came to be known as Martanda. 
As Martanda, Surya named Samjna, Vishvakarma‘s daughter. They had two 
sons and a daughter. 
The sons were named Yama and Vaivasvate (this was the one who became a 
Manu). The daughter was Yami (or Yamuna). 
But so strong was the sun‘s radiance that Samjna could not bear to look at her 
husband. She eventually thought of a way out. She created an image who 
looked exactly like her. This image was called Chhaya (shadow). 
‘I am going off to my father‘s house,’ replied Samjna. ‘Please stay here and 
pretend to be Samjna. Take care of my children and under no circumstances 
divulge that you are Chhaya. 
‘I will do what you ask,’ said Chhaya. ‘But there is a condition. I will not relate 
the truth as long as I am not cursed or as long as no one grasps me by the hair. 
But the moment this condition is violated, I will reveal all.’ Samjna agreed to 
this condition and left for Vishvakarma‘s house. Initially, Vishvakarma was 
quite happy to see his daughter. But days passed and Samjna did not return to 
her husband. 
Vishvakarma now realized that something must be amiss and cajoled his 
daughter to return to Surya. A thousand years passed. Finally, Samjna could 
bear her father‘s scolding no longer. 
Pretending to return to her husband. She left Vishvakarma‘s house. She 
adopted the form of a mare and started to live in the region known as 
Uttarakuru. 
Meanwhile, Surya had not realized that Samjna had been substituted by 
Chhaya. Surya and Chhaya had parented two sons and a daughter. The sons 
were Savarni (who would become a Manu) and Shani (the planet Saturn) and 
the daughter was Tapati. 

1262 
 



Chhaya was clearly more attentive towards her own children than towards 
Samjna‘s. 
Vaivasta did not mind this at all. He was the eldest and more collected and 
balanced. But Yama resented this apparent partiality. In a fit of childish 
petulance, he kicked Chhaya. 
‘You have dared to kick your father‘s wife,’ said Chhaya. ‘I therefore curse you 
that your feet will decay. It is with these feet that you have kicked me.’ Yama 
went and complained to Surya. He had sinned, but he was no more than a 
child. Might his transgression not have been overlooked on that account? 
Besides, whatever the provocation, does a mother ever curse her own son? 
Surya did what he could to mitigate the effects of the curse. But he also 
realized that something must be wrong. When he demanded to know the 
truth from Chhaya, she revealed nothing. But when Surya threatened to curse 
her and grasped her by the hair, the conditions Chhaya had made were 
violated. Chhaya now revealed the truth. 
Surya went to Vishvakarma‘s house to find out where Samjna was. Hearing 
what had happened, Vishvakarma offered to slice off some of the sun‘s 
energy. It was, after all, the sun‘s great radiance that had motivated Samjna to 
do what she had done. Surya was not averse to this idea and his appearance 
was greatly improved by Vishvakarma‘s action. 
Surya got to know that Samjna was in the Uttarakuru kingdom in the form of a 
mare. He adopted the form of a horse and joined his wife there. As horses, 
Surya and Samjna had two sons named Nasatya and Dasra. Since the word 
ashva means horse and since these two had been born when their parents 
had adopted the forms of horse, they were also known as the two Ashvinis. 
They became the physicians of the Gods. After the Ashvinis were born, Surya 
and Samjna returned to their original forms. 
Vaivasvata Manu was the eldest son of Surya and Samjna. Vaivasvata Manu 
performed a yajna so that he might have a son. But instead of a son, a 
daughter named Ila was born. 

1263 
 



Therafter, nine sons were born to Vaivasvata. They were Ikshvaku, Nahusha, 
Dhrishta, Sharyati, Narishyanta, Pramshu, Nabhaga, Karusha, and Prishadhra. 
The kings of the solar line (surya vamsha) were descended from Ikshvaku. In 
this line was born Rama of the Ramayana fame. 
DHUNDHU In the solar line there was a king named Vrihadashva. He had 
twenty-one thousand sons. The eldest son was known as Kuvalashva. When 
Vrihadashva aged, he decided to retire to the forest with his wife. As for the 
kingdom, he resolved that he would hand it over to Kuvalashva. 
But as the coronation ceremony was about to take place, a sage named 
Utanka arrived in the capital. Utanka told Vrihadashva, ‘King, please do not 
retire to the forest just yet. If you do so, we will not be able to to meditate in 
peace. My hermitage is on the shores of the ocean and the seashore is 
frequented by a terrible demon named Dhundhu. He is so powerful that even 
the Gods cannot vanquish him. He hides under the sand and meditates. He 
exhales his breath once every year and when he does so, all hell breaks loose. 
Terrible sandstorms are unleashed and the sun is shrouded in dust. For an 
entire week there are earthquakes. You cannot go away without doing 
something about Dhundhu.’ ‘Great sage,’ replied Vrihadashva, ‘I have given up 
my weapons. It would be most improper for me to take them up once again. 
As for Dhundhu, take my son Kuvalashva with you. I am sure that he will 
vanquish the demon.’ Kuvalashva and his twenty-one thousand brothers 
accompanied Utanka. They came to the shores of the ocean and started to dig 
up the sand in their search for Dhundhu. When the demon got to know about 
this, he unleashed a terrible storm. Tidal waves raged. Flames licked with 
tongues of fire. Dhundhu‘s soldiers attacked Kuvalashva and his brothers. All 
the brothers except three were killed. 
But Dhundhu had not reckoned with Kuvalashva. The storm, the waves and 
the fire could do Kuvalashva no harm. He killed the demon and thus acquired 
the name of Dhundhumara. The sage Utanka blessed him. 
TRISHANKU 

1264 
 



Further down the line, there was a king named Trayaruna. His son was 
Satyavrata. Satyavrata was exceedingly strong. But such was his desire for 
riches, that he committed many sins. His father Trayaruna therefore decided 
to banish him. Trayaruna‘s chief priest was Vashishtha and the sage also 
supported the king‘s decision. 
‘Go away,’ Trayaruna told his son. ‘I do not wish to have a son who is like you.’ 
‘What will I do and where will I live?’ asked Satyavrata. 
‘Go and live with the chandalas (outcasts),’ his father replied. 
Satyabrata went and started to live with the outcasts. In due course. 
Trayaruna retired to the forest and there was no king to rule over the 
kingdom. In the absence of a king, anarchy prevailed. For twelve long years it 
did not rain and there was a terrible drought. Famine raged. 
At the time, the sage Vishvamitra had gone away to the shores of the great 
ocean to meditate. 
The sage‘s wife found it difficult to make both ends meet. There was no food 
to be had. She had no option but to sell off one of her sons in exchange for a 
hundred head of cattle. With this wealth she proposed to feed herself and her 
remaining sons. The person to whom the son was sold, tied a rope around the 
son‘s neck (gala) and proceeded to drag him away from the marketplace. 
The son thus came to acquire the name of Galava. 
Satyavrata discovered what was happening. He rescued Galava and he also 
made arrangements to ensure that Vishvamitra‘s wife and sons did not suffer 
in the sage‘s absence. The entire family was looked after by Satyavrata. 
Satyavrata killed deer and other wild animals in the forest. He brought the 
meat to Galava‘s family. He also tended to his father who had retired to the 
forest. 
One one particular day, there was no game to be had. The sage Vashishtha 
possessed a cow. 

1265 
 



Satyavrata was not at all enamoured of Vashishtha. The sage had, after all, 
recommended that Trayaruna banish his son. Satyavrata therefore stole 
Vashishtha‘s cow and slew it. He ate the meat himself and also fed part of it to 
Vishvamitra‘s family. 
Vashishtha was furious to learn this. He cursed Satyavrata. ‘You have 
committed three sins (shanku),’ he said. ‘You have stolen that which belonged 
to others. That is your first sin. You have caused unhappiness to yur father. 
That is your second sin. And you have stolen and killed my cow. That is your 
third sin. Since you have committed three (tri) sins. I curse you that 
henceforth you will be known as Trishanku.’ After the twelve years of drought 
were over, Vishvamitra returned from his wanderings and was delighted to 
learn that Trishanku had taken care of his family in his absence. Despite 
Vashishtha‘s opposition, Vishvamitra arranged for Trishanku‘s coronation. As a 
sage, Vishvamitra had acquired great powers. He used these powers to send 
Trishanku to heaven in his mortal body. This was such a wonderful act that 
everyone marvelled at it. 
SAGARA 
From Trishanku was descended a king named Vahu. Vahu was so addicted to 
material pursuits that he paid no attention to ruling his kingdom properly. 
Vahu‘s enemies seized the opportunity to defeat him and deprive him of his 
kingdom . Vahu and his wife fled to the forest. Chief among these enemies 
were the Haihayas. But they were aided by the Talajanghas, the Shakas, the 
Yavanas, the Paradas, the Kambojas and the Pahlavas. 
Vahu was old when this happened. Moreover, he was so grief-stricken at 
having lost his kingdom that he had lost all desire to live. He died in the forest. 
King Vahu had two wives. One of these was named Yadavi. The second wife 
was jealous of Yadavi and attempted to kill her by administering some poison. 
The poison however did Yadavi no harm. When Vahu died, Yadavi decided to 
immolate herself on her husband‘s funeral pyre. 
But the sage Ourva intervened. 

1266 
 



‘Please do not do that,’ he requested Yadavi. ‘You are expecting and the act of 
killing the unborn baby would be a crime. Live and let him live. For, he will rule 
well and will defeat his father‘s enemies.’ Persuaded by Ourva, Yadavi did not 
kill herself. She began to live in the sage‘s hermitage. In due course, she gave 
birth to a beautiful boy. When the baby was born, the poison (gara) also 
emerged. Since the word sa means together with, the boy was given the name 
of Sagara. 
Ourva took great interest in Sagara‘s upbringing and education. He taught the 
boy the Vedas and the art of fighting. There was divine weapon known as 
agneyastra. Sagara also learnt how to use this wonderful weapon from Ourva. 
When Sagara grew up, he decided to tackle his father‘s enemies. The 
knowledge of the divine weapon had made him close to invincible. He 
defeated the Haihayas, the Shakas, the Yavanas, the Kambojas, the Parada 
and the Pahlavas. But when he threatened to kill them all, these enemies 
sought refuge with the sage Vashishtha. The sage asked Sagara to spare them 
and saved their lives. But they had to be given some sort of punishment. 
Sagara decreed that the Shakas would have half of their heads shaved off. As 
for the Yavanas and the Kambojas, their heads were completely shaved off. 
The Paradas were instructed that they would have to sport long hair and the 
Pahlavas were forbidden to shave their beards. King Sagara thus conquered 
this enemies and became the ruler of the entire world. He decided to perform 
a horse sacrifice to celebrate his victory. 
Sagara had two wives. They were named Keshini and Sumati. Sagara did not 
have any sons and his wives pleases Ourva with their prayers. Ourva granted 
them boons that they would have sons. 
The stipulation however was that one wife would give birth to a single son 
who would ensure that the line went on. But the other wife would have sixty 
thousand sons who would perish before having any children of their own. 

1267 
 



Keshini desired the single son and accordingly gave birth to Asamanja. Sumati 
gave birth to a gourd. The gourd was reserved in a vat of clarifed butter. After 
nine months had passed, sixty thousand sons came out of the gourd. 
Sagara‘s sons prospered. When a horse sacrifice is performed, a horse is left 
free to wander where it wills. At the time when Sagara organized the horse 
sacrifice, he appointed his sons to look after the horse. These sons insulted 
the sage Kapila and were burnt into ashes. 
THE LUNAR LINE  
Chandra or Soma was th son of the sage Atri. Atri was a very powerful sage. 
He was always busy meditating. For three thousand years he performed 
tapasya, with his arms raised up into the air. He stood there, immobile like a 
tree-trunk. As a result of this wonderful tapasya, energy issued out of his 
body. The Goddesses who preside over the ten directions assimilated this 
energy and produced Chandra. It was in this sense that Chandra was the sage 
Atri‘s son. 
Brahma gave Chandra a divine chariot to ride on. This chariot was drawn by 
one thousand white horses. Chandra ascended the chariot and rode around 
the earth twenty-one times. While he was doing so, some energy from his 
body fell down on the earth. This was the origin of the herbs. 
Brahma appointed Chandra ruler over herbs, seeds, Brahmanas and the 
water. 
Chandra performed a royal sacrifice (rajasuya yajna). The success of this 
ceremony however served to turn Chandra‘s head. The preceptor of the Gods 
was Brihaspati and Brihaspati‘s wife was named Tara. Although Chandra had 
already been married to twenty-seven of Daksha‘s daughters, he abducted 
Tara. The Gods and the sages requested Chandra to return Tara, but he would 
not listen. A terrible fight then raged between the Gods and the demons, the 
Gods fighting on Brihaspati‘s side and the demons on Chandra‘s. After Tara‘s 
name, this samgrama (war). 

1268 
 



Finally, Brahma intervened and sorted the matter out. Chandra returned Tara 
to Brihaspati. 
But Chandra and Tara had a son named Budha. You will remember Ila, 
Vaivasvata Manu‘s daughter. Budha married Ila and their son was called 
Pururava. Pururava was the originator of the lunar line. 
PURURAVA AND URVASHI  
Pururava was a good king who performed many yajnas. He ruled the earth 
well. Urvashi was a beautiful apsara. Pururava met Urvashi and fell in love 
with her. ‘Please marry me,’ he requested. 
‘I will,’ replied Urvashi, ‘But there is a condition. I love these two sheep and 
they will always have to stay by bedside. If I ever lose them, I will remain your 
wife no longer and will return to heaven. Moreover, I shall live only on 
clarified butter.’ Pururava agreed to these rather strange conditions and the 
two were married. They lived happily for sixty-four years. 
But the gandharvas who were in heaven felt despondent. Heaven seemed to 
be a dismal place in Urvashi‘s absence. They therefore hatched a conspiracy to 
get her back. On an appropriate occasion, a gandharva named Vishvavasu 
stole the two sheep. As soon as this happened, Urvashi vanished and returned 
to heaven. 
Pururava pursued Vishvavasu and managed to retrieve the sheep, but by then, 
Urvashi ahd disappeared. The miserable king searched throughout the world 
for her. But in vain. Eventually, Pururava came across Urvashi near a pond in 
Kurukshetra. 
‘Why have you forsaken me?’ asked Pururava. ‘You are my wife. Come and 
live with me.’ ‘I was your wife,’ replied Urvashi. ‘I no longer am, since the 
condition was violated. However, I agree to spend a day with you.’ When one 
year had passed, Urvashi returned to Pururava and presented him with the 
son she had borne him. She spent a day with him and vanished again. This 
happened several times and, in this fashion, Urvashi bore Pururava six sons. 
They were named Ayu, Amavasu, Vishvayu, Shatayu, Gatayu and Dridayu. 

1269 
 



YAYATI  
In the lunar line, there was a king named Nahusha. He had six sons and the 
youngest was named Yayati. After Nahusha, Yayati became king. Yayati had 
two wives. Shukracharya was the preceptor of the Gods and Yayati married 
Devayani, Shukracharya‘s daughter. The king of the danavas was Vrishaparva 
and he had a daughter named Sharmishtha. Yayati also married Sharmishtha. 
Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha gave birth to 
Druhya, Anu and Puru. 
Yayati loved Sharmishtha more. Shukracharya therefore cursed Yayati that he 
would suffer from the untimely onset of old age. When this happened, Yayati 
was miserable. He was still not content with what he had savoured of the 
pleasures of life. 
He told his son Yadu, ‘Please take my old age and give me your youth in 
return. I will return your youth to you when I have finished pleasuring the joys 
of the world. 
‘That I will not,’ replied Yadu. ‘Your old age is due to your own sins. Why on 
earth should I accept it? Please ask my brothers instead.’ These words 
angered Yayati and he curses Yadu that Yadu or his descendants would never 
be kings. Yayat next asked Turvasu, but again met with a refusal. A similar 
curse was therefore imposed on Turvasu and on Druhya and Anu after him. 
The only son who readily accepted Yayati‘s requested was Puru. 
Yayati blessed Puru and took his youth from him. Armed with this borrowed 
youth. Yayati savoured the pleasures of the world and also performed many 
yajnas. When a thousand years had thus passed. Yayati got tired of material 
pursuits. He returned Puru‘s youth and got back his own old age. Yayati 
retired to the forest, after having crowned Puru the king. 
As for Yadu, he was given some minor kingdoms that lay to the west. In similar 
fashion, Turvasu was given some kingdoms towards the south-east. Druhya 
and Anu received kingdoms that lay towards the west, as had Yadu. The 

1270 
 



descendants of Yadu were known as the Yadavas. In this line was born 
Krishna. Also in this line was born Kartavirya Arjuna. 
KARTAVIRYA ARJUNA  
There used to be a king named Kritavirya and Kritavirya‘s son was known as 
Kartavirya Arjuna. 
Arjuna performed tapasya for thousands and thousands of years. Through this 
meditation, he pleased the sage Dattatreya and obtained four wonderful 
boons from the sage. The first boon gave Arjuna a thousand arms. The second 
boon gave him the power to use his persuasion to bring back evil people to 
the righteous path. The third boon was that he would conquer the entire 
earth and rule it according to the dictates of righteousness. The fourth and 
final boon was that Arjuna would meet his end at the hands of an individual 
who was in every way his superior. 
Having obtained these boons, Arjuna conquered the whole earth and ruled it 
well. He performed ten thousand wonderful yajnas. The Gods, the sages, the 
gandharvas and the apsaras always attended these ceremonies. He ruled for 
eighty-seven thousand years. One of Arjuna‘s amazing deeds was his defeat 
and capture of Ravana, the king of Lanka. 
The sun-God, Surya, once came to visit Arjuna in the disguise of a Brahmana. ‘I 
am hungry,’ said Surya. ‘Please give me some food to eat. I will reward you 
well. I am Surya.’ ‘What sort of food will please you?’ asked Arjuna. ‘What will 
I bring?’ ‘I want to eat up all the material objects that there are on earth,’ 
replied Surya. ‘Please burn them up so that I may eat my fill.’ ‘How do you 
expect me to burn up all these objects?’ asked Arjuna. ‘I am only a human and 
have very limited powers.’ Surya then gave Arjuna many divine arrows and a 
wonderful quiver to keep these arrows in. These arrows had the property that 
they burst into flames as soon as they were shot. With these arrows, Arjuna 
burnt up everything and Surya ate his fill. Hermitages, villages, cities and 
forests burned. Varuna was the God of the oceans and Varuna had a son 

1271 
 



named Ashvina. This son performed a lot of tapasya and became a sage 
named Vashishtha or Apava. 
Vashishtha performed tapasya under the water for ten thousand years. When 
he finished his meditations and returned to his hermitage, he found that the 
entire place had been burnt up by Arjuna. Vashishtha was greatly incensed. 
‘Since you have not spared my hermitage, I curse you,’ said Vashishtha. ‘No 
one who bears your name will ever again become a king. There will be a 
Pandava named Arjuna, the son of Kunti. But he will not be a king simply 
because he will bear your name. I also curse you that you will be killed by 
Parashurama.’ Arjuna was eventually killed by Parashurama. 
THE GODS AND THE DEMONS  
The Gods and the demons did not like each other and fought several wars 
with each other. There were twelve such terrible wars. On one particular 
occasion, the demons were defeated by the Gods. Extremely disheartened, 
they went to visit their preceptor, Shukracharya. (son of sage Bhrigu.) The 
demons told Shukracharya. ‘We have been defeated by the Gods. We have no 
option but to go and reside in the underworld.’ ‘Don‘t be so disconsolate,’ 
replied Shukraacharya. ‘I will protect you. I know that Brihaspati, the 
preceptor of the Gods, has obtained wonderful powers by praying to the fire-
God, Agni. The Gods thrive on these powers. I will pray to Shiva and obtain 
powers that can counteract these. Till I come back, please be patient. Why 
don‘t you give up arms and live as hermits till I return?’ The demons agreed to 
this proposition. 
They informed the Gods that they had given up arms and that the Gods could 
do as they willed. 
They had become hermits and would not fight. Meanwhile, Shukracharya 
started to pray to Shiva. Shiva appeared before Shukracharya and discovered 
what the sage desired. Shiva was prepared to grant these powers, subject to a 
condition being met. Shukracharya would have to meditate for a thousand 
years. And throughout this period, he would not be allowed to speak and 

1272 
 



would have to live on smoke. Shukracharya began this process of meditation. 
The Gods got to know what was happening and decided that this was the 
opportune time to attack the demons. 
‘What are you doing?’ said the demons. ‘We have given up arms. This is not 
the time to fight.’ But the Gods would not listen. The demons therefore fled to 
Bhrigu‘s wife and asked her to protect them. Through her powers, the saintly 
woman completely paralysed Indra so that he could not move. At the sight of 
what had happened to their leader, the Gods fled in disarray. 
‘Why are you running away?’ asked Vishnu. ‘As for you, Indra, enter my body. 
I will take you away from this place.’ Indra entered Vishnu‘s body and Vishnu 
proceeded to take him away. This angered Bhrigu‘s wife and she threatened 
to burn up both Indra and Vishnu. But before this could happen, Vishnu sliced 
off the lady‘s head with his sudarshana chakra (a bladed-discus). 
Bhrigu was aghast at this act. ‘Killing a woman is a sin,’ he told Vishnu. ‘You 
have committed a crime. For this crime, I curse you that you will have to be 
born several times on earth. As for my wife, through my powers I will 
resurrect her.’ This is what Bhrigu did and this act terrified Indra. He got 
extremely worried that once Shukracharya returned, there would be no way 
of controlling the demons. Indra had a daughter named Jayanti. He told her, 
‘Shukracharya is meditating. Please go and try to distract him. Make sure that 
his meditation is not successfully completed.’ Jayanti did as her father had 
asked her to. She started to frequent Shukracharya‘s hermitage and served 
him faithfully. In due course, Shukracharya‘s meditation was completed and 
he obtained the desired boon from Shiva.  
Once this task was accomplished. Shukracharya noticed Jayanti. 
‘Who are you and what are you doing here?’ he asked. ‘Why have you been 
serving me thus? In any case, I am pleased with what you have done for me. 
Please tell me what boon you desire.’ ‘Be my husband for ten years,’ 
answered Jayanti. Shukracharya agreed. Shukracharya and Janati had a 
daughter named Devayani. 

1273 
 



Meanwhile, Brihaspati adopted Shukracharya‘s form and started to live with 
the demons. The demons were naturally glad to have their teacher back. They 
did not realize that the person whom they took to be their teacher was 
actually Brihaspati. After the ten years were over, Shukracharya returned and 
found that the demons were following Brihaspati. 
‘Who is this person whom you are following?’ he asked. ‘Give him up. I am the 
real Shukracharya.’ ‘Not at all,’ retorted Brihaspati. ‘I am the real 
Shukracharya.’ The demons did not know what to make of this. The two 
looked exactly alike and there was absolutely no way of telling them apart. 
Eventually they concluded that the person with whom they had been 
associating for the past ten years must be their real guru (teacher). This choice 
so angered Shukracharya that he left in a huff. When the demons realized 
their mistake, they sought to pacify Shukracharya and bring him back. But the 
harm had already been done. The demons could not exploit the powers that 
Shukracharya had gained. 
VISHNU’S INCARNATIONS Because of Bhrigu‘s curse, Vishnu had to be born 
several times on earth. These are known as avataras (incarnations). The Vayu 
Purana now catalogues Vishnu‘s ten incarnations. These are as follows. 
(1) Matsya or fish. 
(2) Narasimha or half-man and half-lion 
(3) Vamana or dwarf. 
(4) Dattatreya, the sage. 
(5) Bhavya. 
(6) Parashurama. 
(7) Rama. 
(8) Vedavyasa. 
(9) Krishna. 
(10) Kalki. 

1274 
 



EPILOGUE  
Lomaharshana finished his recital of the Vayu Purana and told the assembled 
sages, ‘You are indeed lucky. You have heard that which is most sacred. This 
holy act will undoubltedly take you straight to heaven. A person who listens to 
a recital of this sacred text is rewarded with wealth, health and a long life. All 
the sins that a listener may have committed are forgiven. Do you know how 
the knowledge of this Purana was passed down through the ages? It passed 
from Vayu to Ushana, from Ushana to Brihaspati, from Brihaspati to Savita, 
from Savita to Mrityu, from Mrityu to Indra, from Indra to Vashishtha, from 
Vashishtha to Sarasvata, from Sarasvata to Tridhama, from Tridhama to 
Dhananjaya, from Dhananjaya to Kritanjaya, from Kritanjaya to Trinanjaya, 
from Trinanjaya to Bharadvaja, from Bharadvaja to Goutama, from Goutama 
to Niryantara, from Niryantara to Vajashrava, from Vajashrava to 
Somashushma, from Somashushma to Trinavindu, from Trinavindu to Daksha, 
from Daksha to Shaktri, from Shaktri to Parashara, from Parashara to 
Jatukarna and from Jatukarna to Vedavyasa. I learnt the Purana from the great 
Vedavyasa himself. This is a lineage of sages that is truly sacred.’  
Home  
  

1275 
 



17. THE BHAVISHYA PURANA 
The Bhavishya Purana is the eleventh among the Puranas and it contains five 
parts. The first part contains a description of the genesis, greatness of the 
deities and worship of Lord Vishnu, Shiva and Surya. Second, third and fourth 
parts describe about the greatness of Shiva, Vishnu and Surya respectively. 
It gives very accurate forecasts about Adam and Eve, Noah's Ark, the fall of 
Sanskrit and coming of other languages, about the coming of Buddha, 
Madhavacharya, Chandragupta, Ashoka, Jayadeva and Krishna Chaitanya and 
about Kutubuddin & the Shaws ruling Delhi. 
The fifth part contains a description of the heaven. Like other Puranas, 
Bhavishya Purana also contains a description of the ancient kings and Chandra 
and Surya dynasties. 
Interestingly, Bhavishya Purana contains a description of a game that 
resembles modern chess to a great extent. In all, the subject matter of 
Bhavishya Purana seems to be an attempt to prove and establish the 
supremacy of Brahma. 
The Bhavishya Purana is an ancient text authored by Sri Veda Vyasa Muni, the 
compiler of the Vedic texts. It is listed among the eighteen major Puranas. 
Bhavishya means "future" and Purana means "history", so the text's name 
would translate literally as "The History of the Future". Though the text was 
written many thousands of years before the recorded events took place, by 
the power of his mystic vision, Sri Vyasa was able to accurately predict the 
happenings of the modern times. One of the text's poetic styles is to present 
the events as though they have already happened. This is a common practice 
in Sanskrit poetry, and does not indicate that the book was written in modern 
times. 
Modern westernised scholars, who keep cooing about the forecasts of 
Nostradamus, reject the contents of Bhavishya Purana mostly on the grounds 
that its information is too accurate. But we should ask ourselves: If there was 
an empowered saint, who knew past, present and future, and if he chose to 

1276 
 



write a book named "the History of the Future", shouldn't it contain accurate 
information about the modern times, as the title suggests? We cannot 
disqualify it simply because it speaks accurately of the British controlling India, 
Hitler fighting the world, and Max Mueller misrepresenting the Vedic 
teachings. "Veda" means knowledge, and the Vedic texts contain knowledge 
of everything - past, present and future. 
This Purana consists of 7 chapters. We are giving giving below  some of the 
available translations. 
11.1 Biblical and Modern History [From the Pratisarga Parva, Chapters Four to 
Seven.]  
Suta Goswami said:  
Once upon a time in Hastinapura, Pradyota the son of Kshemaka was leading 
an assembly and meanwhile the great sage Narada arrived there. King 
Pradyota happily honored him. Having him seated on the seat the sage told 
king Pradyota, "Your father was killed by the mlecchas, therefore he attained 
Yamaloka or the hellish planet. If you perform a ‗mleccha-yajna‘, then by the 
effect of this sacrifice your father will attain the heavenly planets." Hearing 
this king Pradyota immediately called the best of the learned Brahmanas and 
started ‗mleccha-yajna‘ in Kuruksetra. They built a yajna-kunda which was 16 
yojanas in square (128 miles). They meditated on the demiGods and offered 
oblations of mlecchas. 
There are haras, hunas, barvaras, gurundas, sakas, khasas, yavanas, pallavas, 
romajas and those who are situated in different dvipas and in kamaru, china 
and the middle of the ocean; all of them were called with the mantra and 
burnt to ashes. Then he (the king) gave dakshina (donation) to the Brahmanas 
and performed abhiseka. As a result his father Kshemaka went to the 
heavenly planets. After that he became famous everywhere as a mleccha-
hanta or destroyer of mlecchas. He ruled the earth for ten thousand years and 
went to heaven. He had a son named Vedavan who ruled for two thousand 
years. 

1277 
 



At that time the Kali purusha prayed to Lord Narayana along with his wife. 
After sometime the Lord apperared to him and said, "This age will be a good 
time for you. I will fulfil your desire having various kinds of forms. There is a 
couple named Adama and his wife Havyavati. They are born from Vishnu-
kardama and will increase the generations of mlecchas. Saying this, the Lord 
disappeared. Having great joy the Kali purusha went to Nilacha Vyasa said: 
"Now you hear the future story narrated by Suta Goswami. This is the full 
story of of Kali-yuga, hearing this you will become satisfied." In the eastern 
side of Pradan city where there is a a big God-given forest, which is 16 square 
yojanas in size. The man named Adama was staying there under a Papa-
Vriksha or a sinful tree and was eager to see his wife Havyavati. The Kali 
purusha quickly came there assuming the form of a serpent. He cheated them 
and they disobeyed Lord Vishnu. 
The husband ate the forbidden fruit of the sinful tree. They lived by eating air 
with the leaves called udumbara. After they had sons and all of them became 
mlecchas. Adama's duration of life was nine-hundred and thirty years. He 
offered oblations with fruits and went to heaven with his wife. His son was 
named Sveta-nama, and he lived nine-hundred and twelve years. Sveta-
nama's son was Anuta, who rulled one-hundred years less than his father. His 
son Kinasa rulled as much as his grandfather. His son Malahalla ruled eight-
hundred ninety five years. His son Virada rulled 160 years. His son Hamuka 
was devoted to Lord Vishnu, and offering oblations of fruits he achieved 
salvation. He ruled 365 years and went to heaven with the same body being 
engaged in mleccha-dharma. 
Having good behavior, wisdom, qualities like a Brahmana and worship of God, 
these things are called mleccha-dharma. The great souls have declared that 
the dharma of the mleccha is devotion to God, worship of fire, nonviolence, 
austerity and control of the senses. The son of Hamuka was Matocchila. He 
ruled for 970 years. His son Lomaka ruled 777 years and went to heaven. His 
son Nyuha (Noah) ruled for 500 years. He had three sons named Sima, Sama 
and Bhava. Nyuha was a devotee of Lord Vishnu. 

1278 
 



Once the Lord appeared in his dream and said: ‘My dear Nyuha, please listen, 
there will be devastation on the seventh day. Therefore, you have to be very 
quick that you make a big boat and ride in it. O chief of the devotees, you will 
be celebrated as a great king‖. 
Then he made a strong boat which was 300 feet long, 50 feet wide and 30 feet 
high. (In the Bible the Ark is described as, "Its length was 300 cubits, its width 
was 50 cubits, it had three stories and its height was 30 cubits.") It was 
beautiful and all the living entities could take shelter in it. He then himself 
rode in it, engaged in meditating on Lord Vishnu. 
Lord Indra called the devastating cloud named Sambartaka and poured heavy 
rain continuously for 40 days. The whole earth, Bharat-varsa, had merged in 
the water and four oceans came up together. Only Visala or Badarikasrama 
was not submerged. There were 80,000 great transcendentalists in Visala who 
joined with king Nyuha and his family. 
All of them were saved and everything else was destroyed. 
At that time all the sages praised the eternal energy of Lord Vishnu. Being 
pleased by the prayers of the sages, the Vishnu-maya reduced the waters of 
devastation. After one year gradually the earth become visible. Under the hill 
there is a place named Sisina and the king was situated in that place with his 
other people. When the water completely dried up, king Nyuha came back to 
his place. 
Suta Goswami continued: The mleccha, king Nyuha became attached to Lord 
Vishnu and as a result Lord Vishnu increased his generation. Then he created a 
language fit for the mlecchas, unfavorable to the Vedas. He named it as 
brahmi-bhasha, or brahmi language, full of bad words, for increasing the 
degradation of Kali-yuga. The Lord who is Himself the master of intelligence 
gave this language to Nyuha. Nyuha named his tree sons opposite. 
They were known as Sima, Hama, Yakuta and also Yakuta, Sapta putra, Jumara 
and Majuya. The name of their countries were known as Madi, Yunana, 
Stuvaloma, Tasa and Tirasa. 

1279 
 



Hama who was the second son of his father, had four sons know as Kusa, 
Misra, Kuja and Kanaam. Kusa had six sons - Havila, Sarva, Toragama, Savatika, 
NimaruhaI and Mahavala. Their sons were known as Kamala, Sinara and 
Uraka. And their countries names are Akvada, Bavuna and Rasana. 
After telling this story Suta Goswami influenced by Yoga-nidra entered mystic 
slumber. 
He woke up after two thousand years and thereupon he said: ‘Now I‘m going 
to say about the generation of Sima. Because he was the first son of his father 
he became the king. 
This mleccha king ruled over the country for 500 years. His son Arkansoda 
ruled for 434 years. His son Sihla ruled for 460 years. His son Iratasya ruled the 
same length as his father. His son Phataja ruled for 240 years. His son Rau 
ruled for 237 years. His son Juja ruled the same length as his father. His son 
Nahura ruled for 160 years, and he destroyed his many inimical kings. His son 
Tahara ruled the same length as his father. He had three sons: Avirama, 
Nahura and Harana. Thus I have explained the generation of mlecchas with 
the indication of their names only. The mleccha language is considered the 
lowest language because it bears the curse of Goddess Sarasvati. Thus I have 
summarily narrated the rise of the mlecchas in Kali-yuga. 
Sanskrt is the language by which the whole Bharata-Varsa is being praised and 
glorified. 
The same language, after going to another country became the mleccha 
language and mlecchas took advantage of it. 
After hearing all this, the sages situated in Badarikashrama, worshipped Lord 
NaraNarayana and meditated upon them for 200 years. When they woke up 
from their meditation, they inquired from their teacher Suta Goswami:’O 
disciple of Sri Vyasa, you are so fortunate and greatly intelligent, may you live 
long. 
Now please tell us who is the king at the present time?" Suta Goswami said: 
‘At the present time, the Kali-yuga has already passed its 3000 years. Now the 

1280 
 



king Sankha is ruling the earth and in the mleccha countries the king named 
Sakapat is ruling. Please hear about how they came up." When the Kali-yuga 
passed 2000 years, the dynasty of mlecchas increased. They created many 
paths to grow and gradually the whole earth become full of mlecchas. The 
spiritual master and teacher of the mlecchas was named Musa. He was 
residing on the bank of the river Sarasvati, and he spread his doctrince 
throughout the whole world. As soon as Kali-yuga started, the devotion to the 
Lord and the language of the Vedas were destroyed. There are four kinds of 
mleccha languages: Vraja-bhasa, Maharastri, Yavani and Garundika. In this 
way there are four million kinds of other languages. 
For example: paniyam (water) is called pani, bubhuksa-hunger is called bhukh. 
Paniyamdrinking is called papadi and bhojanam-eating is called kakkanam. Isti 
is called suddharava, istini is called masapavani, ahuti is called aju and dadati 
is called dadhati. 
The word pitri is called paitara and bhrata is bather and also pati. This is the 
yavani lanugage in which the asva is called aspa, Janu is jainu and sapta-sindhu 
is called saptahindu. 
Now you hear about Gurundika language. Ravi-vara (the first day of the week) 
is called sunday, phalguna and chaitra months are called pharvari (February). 
Sasti is called sixty, these kinds of examples are there. 
Crime is becoming prominent in the holy place of Sapta-puri. Gradually the 
people of Aryavata are becoming theives, hunters, bhillas and fools. The 
followers of mlecchadharma in foreign countries are intelligent and having 
good qualities, whereas the people of Aryavarta are bereft of good qualities. 
Thus the ruling of mlecchas is also in Bharata (India) and its islands. Knowing 
all this, O great and intelligent sage, you should just perform the devotional 
service to Lord Hari. 
The great sage Saunaka inquired: ‘Please tell us, what was the reason that the 
mlecchas did not arrive in Brahmavarta. 

1281 
 



Suta Goswami said: That was by the influence of Goddess Sarasvati that they 
could not enter that place. By the order of the demiGods, when the Kali-yuga 
pursued his 1,000 years, a Brahmana named Kasyapa come down to earth 
from the heavenly planets with his wife Aryavatil. They had ten spotless sons 
who are known by the names: Upadhayaya, Diksita, Pathaka, Sukla, Misra, 
Agnihotri, Dvi-vedi, Tri-vedi, Catur-vedi and Pandey. Among them was the 
learned one full of knowledge. He went to Kashmir and worshipped Goddess 
Sarasvati with red flowers, red akshata (rice), incense, lamps, naivedya (food 
offerings) and puspanjali (flower offerings). To please her he praised her with 
some prayers, asking her for better knowledge of Sankrt to put mlecchas into 
illusion. 
Being pleased by his prayers she remainded situated in his mind and blessed 
him with knowledge. Then the sage went to the country known as Misra and 
put all the mlecchas into illusion by the greace of Goddess Sarasvati. 
Then he made 10,000 people as dvijas or twice born Brahmanas; he made 
2,000 people into vaishyas; and the rest of them as shudras. He came back 
with them and staying in Arya-desha (India) he engaged in the activites of the 
sages. They were known as Aryans and by the grace of Goddess Sarasvati their 
generation gradually increased upto 4 million, both the men and women with 
their sons and grandsons. Their king, Kasyapa muni, ruled the earth for 120 
years. 
There were 8,000 sudras in the county known as Rajputra (Rajput) and their 
king was Arya-prithu. His son was Magadha. The sage made him a king and 
left. 
Saunaka inquired: "O disciple of Vyasa, O Lomaharsana, please tell us who 
were the kings to rule the earth in Kali-yuga, after Magadha?" Suta Goswami 
said: When king Magadha, the son of Kasyapa was ruling the earth, he 
remembered his father's administration and he separated the Arya-desha 
(India) into many states. The state which is on the eastern side of Pancala is 
known as Magadha, the state of Kalinga is on the east-south side, the state of 
Avanta is in the south, Amartadesha is to the south-west, Sindhu-desha is on 

1282 
 



the western side, Kaikaya is to the northwest, Madra-desha is in the north, 
and Koninda-desha is to the north-east. These states are named according to 
his sons' names. After performing a sacrifice he gave the states to his sons. 
Lord Balabhadra became pleased with his sacrifice, and Sisunaga appeared 
from the sacrifice as his son. He ruled for 100 years and his son Kakavarma 
ruled for 90 years. His son Kshemadharma ruled for 80 years and his son ruled 
for 70 years. His son Vedamisra ruled for 60 years. His son Ajata-nipu ruled for 
50 years. His son Darbhaka ruled for 40 years, his son Udayasva ruled for 30 
years, his son Nanda-Vardhana ruled for 20 years, his son Nanda-suta, who 
was born from the womb of a sudri or a low class lady, also ruled for 20 years. 
His son Pranancala ruled for 10 years. His son Parananda also ruled 10 years. 
His son Samananda ruled for 20 years. His son Priyananta ruled for 20 years, 
his son Devananda also ruled for 20 years. his son Yajna-bhanga ruled for 10 
years. His son Mauryananda ruled for 10 years. And his son Mahananda ruled 
for 10 years. 
At this time Lord Hari was remembered by Kali. At that time the great and 
famous Gautama, the son of Kasyapa introduced the Buddhist religion, and 
attained Lord Hari in Pattana. 
Gautama ruled over 10 years. From him Shakya muni was born, who ruled 20 
years. His son Shuddhodana ruled 30 years. His son Shakyasimha became the 
king on Satadri after 2000 years and he ruled for 60 years, by which time all 
the people were Buddhists. This was the first position of Kali-yuga and the 
Vedic religion was destroyed. 
If Lord Vishnu becomes a king then all the people would follow Him. The 
activities of the world are carried out by the prowess of Lord Vishnu. He is the 
master of maya or the illusory energy and whoever takes shelter of that Lord 
Hari, though he may be a sinful and abominable person, will become 
liberated. 
Buddha-simha was born from Shakyasimha and he ruled for only 30 years. 
Buddhasimha‘s son was Chandra-gupta, who married with a daughter of 
Suluva, the Yavana king of Pausasa. Thus he mixed the Buddhists and yavanas. 

1283 
 



He ruled for 60 years. From him Vindusara was born and ruled for the same 
number of years as his father. His son was Ashoka. At this time the best of the 
Brahmanas, Kanyakubja, performed sacrifice on the top of a mountain named 
Arbuda. By the influence of Vedic mantras, four Kshatriyas appeared form the 
yajna. Among these four Pramara was samavedi, Chapahani was yajurvedi, 
Shukla was trivedi and Pariharaka was the Atharvavedi. They were 
accustomed to ride on elephants. They kept Ashoka under their control and 
annihilated all the Buddhists. It is said there were 4 million Buddhists and all 
of them were killed by uncommon weapons. After that Pramara became king 
in Avanta and he constructed a large city called Ambavati for his happiness. It 
was as big as 4 yojanas or about 32 miles. 
Then Suta Goswami said: "My dear Brahmanas I‘m being influenced by yoga-
nidra, therefore, please go to your respective ashramas and meditate on Lord 
Vishnu." After the completion of 2,000 years, Suta Goswami said: When the 
kali-yuga had passed his 3,710 years, at that time the king was Pramara who 
ruled 6 years, from him Mahamada was born. He ruled 3 years and his son 
Devapi did the same. His son Devaduta also did the same. From him 
Gandharva-sena was born, who went to the forest after ruling for over 50 
years and having given his kingdom to his son Shankha. Shankha ruled for over 
30 years. Lord Indra sent a heavenly girl to Gandharva-sena named Viramati. A 
jewel like son was born form her womb.  
At the time of his birth, there were flowers raining from the sky, many 
auspicious instruments were played and the wind was blowing pleasingly. The 
name of the baby was Siva-drishti, who later left for the jungle with his 
disciples. After 20 years he became perfect in Karma-yoga. When kali-yuga 
copmleted 3,000 years, the terrible symptoms of kali had appeared. That baby 
took birth in the secret place of Kailasa, by the benediction of Lord Shiva, to 
destroy the shakas and to increase the Arya-dharma or the Vedic reigion. His 
father Gandharva-sena named his son as Vikramaditya and become happy. 
This child was very intelligent and very pleasing to his parents. When he was 5 
years old, he left for the forest to perform austerities and he continued it upto 

1284 
 



12 years. After 12 years he went to the holy city named Ambavati with all the 
opulence and accepted the transcendental throne sent by Lord Shiva. For his 
security Goddess Parvati created a Vetala (a king of ghosts) and sent it to king 
Vikramaditya‘s palace.  
Once the powerful king went to the temple of Lord Shiva named as 
Mahakaleshvara, who is the chief of the devas, and who has a bow named 
Pinaka. There he worshipped Lord Shiva. In that place he built a religious 
council hall with the pillars made of various metals and decorated with many 
kinds of jewels and covered with so many plants and creepers and flowers. In 
that hall he kept a celestial throne. He invited the foremost Brahmanas who 
are well-versed in Vedic knowledge, worshipped them with proper hospitality 
and heard many religious histories from them. After that one demiGod named 
Vitala come there having a form of a Brahmana. Glorifying and blessing the 
king, he sat down on the seat and said: O master of this earthly planet, king 
Vikramaditya, if you are very eager to hear them I will describe the stories and 
histories to you. 
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Pratisarga Parva of the Bhavishya 
Purana. 
11.2 The Prediction of Islam [From the third part of the Pratisarga Parva.] Shri 
Suta Gosvami said: In the dynasty of king Shalivahana, there were ten kings 
who went to the heavenly planets after ruling for over 500 years. Then 
gradually the morality declined on the earth. At that time Bhojaraja was the 
tenth of the kings on the earth. 
When he saw that the moral law of conduct was declining he went to conquer 
all the directions of his country with ten-thousand soldiers commanded by 
Kalidasa. He crossed the river Sindhu and conquered over the gandharas, 
mlecchas, shakas, kasmiris, naravas and sathas. He punished them and 
collected a large ammount of wealth. Then the king went along with 
Mahamada (Mohammad), the preceptor of mleccha-dharma, and his 
followers to the great God, Lord Shiva, situated in the desert. He bathed Lord 
Shiva with Ganges water and worshipped him in his mind with pancagavya 

1285 
 



(milk, ghee, yoghurt, cow dung, and cow urine) and sandalwood paste, etc. 
After he offered some prayers and pleased him. 
Suta Goswami said: After hearing the king‘s prayers, Lord Shiva said: O king 
Bhojaraja, you should go to the place called Mahakakshvara, that land is called 
Vahika and now is being contaminated by the mlecchas. In that terrible 
country there no longer exists dharma. There was a mystic demon named 
Tripura, whom I have already burnt to ashes, he has come again by the order 
of Bali. He has no origin but he achieved a benediction from me. His name is 
Mahaoda and his deeds are like that of a ghost. Therefore, O king, you should 
not go to this land of the evil ghost. By my mercy your intelligence will be 
purified. Hearing this the king came back to his country....... 
That city is known as their site of pilgrimage, a place which was Madina or free 
from intoxication. Having a form of a ghost (Bhuta), The symptoms of my 
followers will be that they first of all will cut their genitals, have no shikha, but 
having beard.......Therefore, they will be known as musalman. 
The intelligent king, Bhojaraj established the language of Sanskrit in three 
varnas - the Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaisyas - and for the shudras he 
established prakrita-bhasha, the ordinary language spoken by common men. 
After ruling his kingdom for 50 years, he went to the heavenly planet. The 
moral laws established by him were honored even by the demiGods. The arya-
varta, the pious land is situated between Vindhyacala and Himacala or the 
mountains known as Vindhya and Himalaya. The Aryans reside there, but 
varna-sankaras reside on the lower part of Vindhya. The musalman people 
were kept on the other side of the river Sindhu. 
On the island of Barbara, Tusha and many others also the followers of 
Isamsiha were also situated as they were managed by a king or demigods 
11.3 The Prediction of Buddhism [From the 29th chapter of the Pratisarga 
Parva.] Long ago in the country known as Citrartha, the inhabitants of the 
heavenly planets used to come to play during the time of autumn. One day a 
heavenly apsara know as Manjughosha came to that place where the sage 

1286 
 



Shuka was residing. Seeing this beautiful boy, she tried to attract him while 
singing and dancing, being overwhelmed by lusty desires. She praised him 
with a beautiful prayer holding her hands and bowing down. Somehow, she 
pleased the muni. Then the glorious Shuka, hearing this auspicious prayer 
asked her to request a benediction. Manjughosha humbly said: ‖O lord, you 
are the protector of those who came to your shelter, therefore I‘m at your 
shelter, please become my husband‖. The sage accepted her and after some 
time they produced a son named ‗Muni‘ who performed austerity very strictly 
upto 12 years. He married the daughter of Svarnadeva, the God of gold. They 
gave birth to a daughter named Kinnari. She was very young and beautiful. 
She performed austerity to please Lord Shiva, and as a benediction Lord Shiva 
instructed her to a sober sage Makaranda. 
Then her father, Muni, asked Lord Shiva to bless her, so that they will 
successfully make progress in this world. 
Lord Shiva said: Upto 30 years you will enjoy your country in the middle of the 
earth, then it will be destroyed. After hearing this Muni went to his place with 
Makaranda and resided there. As soon as the 29th year started the battle took 
place among those kings who took birth as the incarnations of the associates 
of Krishna. Bauddha, the Lord of nyuhas (the lessened people) attacked the 
beautiful city of Netrapala, thinking that this city is wonderfully decorated 
with various kinds of jewels. The powerful king Bauddha-simha who had 
seven-million soldiers, fought with those kings who had only three million 
soldiers. The fight went on terribly between the armies for seven days and 
nights. The great powerful kings, who killed all the inimical armies protected 
by Baudha-simha, were Yoga-simha, Bhoga-simha and Vijaya. 
After that more Buddhists came from the countries known as Shyama and 
Japaka, and all of them were magicians. Again they had a large battle which 
lasted for one month. Then Netrasimha arrived with seven million soldiers 
protected by eight generals, for the destruction of the Buddhists. Being afraid, 
all the Buddhists left India completely and went to China to continue the war 
from there. The opposite army also continued following them. 

1287 
 



When they arrived on the bank of the Huha river, it was the month of Magh, 
the second half part of the month of January, the fight took place again. There 
were one million soldiers each from the countries of Syama and Japaka, and 
ten million soldiers from China assembled for a fight. On the other side, 
Krishnamsa, Deva, Netrapala, Mandalika, Dhanyapada, Lallasimha, Talana and 
Jana nayaka were the generals, each of them having one million soldiers. 
There was a terrible battle between the Buddhists and the Aryans. In that war 
seven million Buddhists, and two million Aryans were killed. Being afraid the 
Buddhists ran away from the battle and went to their home to produce a 
wooden army with the help of a machinery arrangement. They made ten-
thousand elephants (made out of wood) along with warriors, one million 
horses, one thousand buffaloes, one thousand hogs, one thousand tigers, one 
thousand swans, and seven thousand camels. All these creatures had wooden 
warriors on their back. Thus with the wooden army which was 125,000 in 
number, they killed two million soldiers protected by Krishnamsas. Seeing this 
wonder Jayanta, the expert fighter shot fire arrows toward the wooden 
armies, so that they were immediately destroyed, being burnt to ashes. Only 
three million kshatriyas (warriors) were left, and they glorified the proficient 
warrior Jayanta again and again. Then the Buddhists from China, made a 
twenty thousand strong iron horse calvary and sent them to fight. The 
powerful warrior Yogasimha, riding on an elephant held the bow and arrows 
in his hands and shot to the neck of the iron warriors. 
Being afflicted by the arrows of Yogasimha five thousand soldiers were killed. 
Seeing this, Bauddhasimha made an iron tiger and sent it to Yogasimha. By the 
attack of that iron tiger the brave Yogasimha was finally killed, and then 
Bhogasimha riding on a horse, went to fight with the tiger. He killed the tiger 
by throwing a missile, and roared loudly. Then a lion was sent to him by 
Bauddhasimha and thus he (Bhogasimha) was killed by a lion. 
When the son of Swarna-vati (Jayanta) saw that his maternal uncles were 
already dead, he rode on a powerful horse and went to Bauddhasimha. He 
took illusory arrows and put the opposite army into delusion along with 

1288 
 



Bauddhasimha. He captured ten-thousand kings including Bauddhasimha, and 
returned to Krishnamsas having destroyed the mechanical armies. 
Then all of them happily went to the city and forcibly ‘looted‖ the wealth from 
the palace, which was very opulent, and came back the fort of the king. 
Jayanta came and released Bauddhasimha. After being released he offered his 
daughter Padmaja to Jayanta and also offered 100,000,000 golden coins for 
the pleasure of his in law. After that all the Buddhists made their vows there 
itself saying ‘We will never go to Arya-desa to invade the country.’ Then they 
offered their homage and left. They went to Netrapala with their three million 
remaining soldiers. 
11.4 The Prediction of India’s Kings [From the 31st chapter of the Pratisarga 
Parva.] Suta Goswami said: The great powerful king of Madrakesa worshipped 
the mendicants of the heavenly planets (the Asvini kumaras) for five years and 
after having received a benediction from them he produced ten sons and one 
beautiful young daughter named Kantinati. King Madraka invited Maharaj 
Suryavarna (the present king of Hastinapura), and gave his daughter to him 
with proper conduct. 
Having accepted the new wife, Suryavarna quickly returned to his home with 
his army. 
There was a mystic demon named Karbura, the son of Bigbhisana, when he 
saw Kantimati the daughter of king Madrakesa, he came there and kidnapped 
her in their presence and went to a mountain called Sahyadri. Seeing this 
incident Mahiraja became very upset and lamented again and again. Mahiraja 
came to Hastinapura and sent a message to Krishnamsa. He explained 
everything to him and immediately with five hundred warriors Krishnamsa 
went to Sahyadri mountain and said fearlessly: ‘O best of the demons, please 
listen. Your father Bibhishana is a great devotoee, and you are the dear son of 
him, therefore, you should not act in this manner (sinfully) which is the cause 
of the destruction of family. Do you remember, long ago mother Sita was 
kidnapped by Ravana and what happened to him?’ The rakshasa said, 
"Previously she was the daughter of a Gandharva and my beloved wife, but 

1289 
 



because of a curse by a sage she took birth on the earthly planet. Therefore, 
feeling her separation I went to Madrakesa. Although I stayed there so many 
days, being afraid of the king I could not kidnap her. Now she is in my control, 
but if you defeat me in battle you can take her back. Then Krishnamsa started 
fighting with him with a sword and it went on for seven nights. Finally he 
defeated the rakshasa, and with Kantimati came back to Delhi to see 
Mahiraja. The king (Mahiraja) offered 10,000,000 golden coins to the great 
Krishnamsa. Then he came to Pramdavana, or the forest called Pramoda, with 
his friends. 
Suta Goswami said: There was a powerful king named Purnamala in Pattana. 
He worshipped the Vasus for five years and received a benediction from them. 
By their blessings he had ten sons and a daughter named Vidyun mala. For the 
marriage of his daughter he invited king Mahiraja and with seven million 
soldiers he gave his daughter to the son of Mahiraja (Bhima). 
Bhima came back happily to his home (Hastinapura) with his beautiful wife. 
Then the king of paisaca-dasa, Sahoda, came with ten-thousand mlecchas to 
get Vidyunmala. They came to Kurukshetra by the order of Bali, the grandson 
of Prahlada Maharaja. They broke the deities of Gods, killed so many cows 
and in the places of sacred water they put cowblood. 
Sahoda, the mleccha king, wrote a letter and sent it to Mahiraja. King 
Mahiraja answered: "O mleccha king, you are the master of the mlecchasi, 
why are you worried about Vidyunmala? You should know that I‘m the one 
who can shoot arrows just by hearing a sound and I‘m the central point of the 
country of the thieves." Then the king went to Kurukshetra with three million 
soldiers. There was a large, terrible fight between them. At night in the month 
of Jesta (July), Bali Maharaja came from Patala, the lowest region with ten-
thousand demons and killed the soldiers of the king very quickly, eating them 
again and again. The king, being afraid took shelter of Goddess Sarasvati. After 
that immediately Krishnamsas arrived and killed the ten-thousand demons. 
They came to Bali, the Lord of the demons, and pleased him with their words. 

1290 
 



Then Baliraja said: I‘m very pleased with you, now you can ask for any 
benediction. 
They said: These demons should never come to Aryadesha (India) with you, all 
of you should stay always in mleccha-desha and eat the followers of mleccha-
dharma. 
Baliraja became upset hearing these fearful, terrible words. 
Then Krishnamsa said: as long as I‘m in this world you should simply stay in 
your home, after that you come here and do whatever you like‖. 
Hearing this the mleccha king Sahoda went back to Rasatala, the sixth lowest 
region of demons. 
11.5 The Prediction of Nimbarka Acharya [From the 7th chapter of the 
Pratisarga Parva.] The sun God, being pleased by the praise of the demiGods, 
said: By the order of the Lord Krishna, Sudarshana will take birth in the 
Dvapara-yuga, and will be known as Nimbaditya (Nimbarka). He will be able to 
remove the declination of religious principles. 
Suta Goswami said: Now you hear about the pastimes of the great Nimbarka. 
Lord Krishna personally ordered him to appear on the auspicious bank of 
Narmada river, which flows to the southern side of mountain Meru. That state 
is known as Tailanga, the place used by the devarsis, the Godly sages. 
Lord Krishna said: "You receive knowledge from devarsi Narada and establish 
the true principles of religion. You should remain in Mathura, Naimisaranya 
and Dvaraka." Lord Sudarshana accepted the order of Lord Krishna sarying, 
"Yes," and appeared on the earth to fulfill the desires of the devotees. There 
was a broad-minded holy Brahmana living in the auspicious state of Tailanga. 
His name was Aruna and was well versed in the Vedas and Vedangas. His wife 
was known as Jayanti. They were living an austere life like the sages. The 
brilliant luster of Sudarshana suddenly entered in the heart of Jayanti, and by 
that luster she looked brilliant like the moon. When the time arrived with all 
auspiciousness and good qualities, in Gaura paksha purnima of Kartika month, 
Vrisha rasi, the moon in Krittika, the five grahas (planets) situated in higher 

1291 
 



places, in the evening at the time of sunset, in Masa-lagna, the Lord of the 
universe (Sudarshana), who engaged the whole universe in Vedic religion, 
appeared from mother Jayanti (as Nimbarka). 
One day Lord Brahma went to Nimbarka‘s ashrama just before the sunset and 
said: O Brahmana, I‘m very hungry, as long as the sun is in the sky, please give 
me something to eat. (I will not eat after the sun sets). The Brahmana 
(Nimbarka) gave him food and while he was eating the sun went down. Then 
the Brahmana by his power kept a sudarshana on a nimbe tree. Lord Brahma 
wondered seeing that sunlike shine and paid his obeisances to the Brahmana 
by lying flat on the ground. Pleased with his austerity Lord Brahma said: 
Excellent. You will become famous on this earth, and you will be known as 
Nimbaditya (Nimbarka - One who made the sun appear from a Neem tree). 
11.6 The Prediction of Madhva and Sridhara [From the 7th chapter of the 
Pratisarga Parva.] Brihaspati said: Long ago, during the age of treta, O Indra, 
there was a Brahmana named Shakrasharma, in Ayodhya. He worshipped 
demiGods such as the Asvini Kumaras, Rudras, Vasus, and Surya with the 
mantras mentioned in the Yajur-veda. After worshipping, he satisfied them by 
offering oblations every day. Thus being pleased with his worship all the 330 
million demiGods awarded him all desired objects and even the rarest things. 
By the benediction of the demiGods the Brahmana lived on this earth for 
tenthousand years without getting old and having no disturbance. After 
leaving his body he become the Sun-God and predominated the sun planet for 
one hundred thousand years, before going to Brahmaloka. He spent eight 
thousand celestial years for visiting the higher planets and then returned to 
the sun planet. 
Hearing this, Lord Indra with his sober intelligence began to worship the sun-
God along with other demiGods in the month of June-July. On the purnima, 
the full moon day, the sun-God came down to the earth and said to 
demiGods: I will take birth in Kali-yuga in Vrindavana and this Brahmana will 
execute favorable acts for the demiGods. He will be born as a son of Madhava, 
named Madhu and follow the Vedic path. 

1292 
 



Suta Gosvami said: Saying this the sun-God created a light from his body and 
sent it to Vrindavana. Attracting all the irreligious people with pleasing speech 
he gave them Vaishnavi-shakti or the spiritual energy of Lord Vishnu, the 
bestower of enjoyment and liberation. Thus he become famous, known as 
Madhvacarya. 
Jiva said: In the age of Dvapara, there was a Brahmana named Megha Sharma. 
He was very much religious, intelligent, learned and a follower of the Vedic 
path. He was engaged in farming, and with the ten percent profit from 
farming he was worshipping the demiGods every day with devotion.  
Once there was no rain during the administration of Maharaja Shantanu for 
five years, but the farm of Megha sharma was about four miles wider and was 
watered by rain. Naturally the grain-rate increased and Megha sharma 
became rich by taking advantage of the scarcity. Other people being so 
distressed took shelter of the king. The king called Megha sharma and said: O 
great Brahmana, I offer my obeisances unto you, please became my Guru and 
guide us, so that we can be free from the scarcity. 
Megha sharma said: when the month of Shravana (July-August) starts, you 
should call twelve Vedic Brahmanas to chant one-hundred thousand times the 
mantra of the sun-God with the proper mind. Then on the full moon day 
(purnima) offer one tenth the number of oblations in the sacrificial fire, 
through the Brahmanas. If you could do this as mentioned, you will become 
free from anxiety. So the king performed accordingly and fed all the 
Brahmanas, then the sun-God being pleased by this poured heavy rain on the 
earth from all sides. After this king Shantanu, engaged in performing Surya-
vrata and become a greatly pious person. Whoever he touched with his hand 
immediately turned to a young man. By the mercy of the sun-God, 
Meghasarma lived for five-hundred years, being freed from old age, and then 
went to sun-planet. After 100,000 years he will attain Brahmaloka. 
While he was speaking thus, sun-God revealed his identity to Jiva and went to 
Prayaga (Allahabad) and being in a happy mood he said to the demiGods: ‘In 
kali-yuga, when the mlecchas will be ruling the kingdom, I will come to 

1293 
 



Vrindavana and preach for the mission of the Devas." Suta said: Then the sun-
God descended in Vrindavana as a son of Deva-sharma, named Sridhara. He 
studied Srimad Bhagavatam very deeply and a great commentary on it which 
is known as Sridhar-bhasya, the commentary of Sridhara. 11.7 The Prediction 
of Jayadeva Gosvami Brihaspati said: Long ago there was a Brahmana named 
Heli, in the beautiful city Pampapura. He was a worshipper of the sun-God and 
he knew the 64 arts. He avoided the mood of accepting dakshina (donations) 
and he became an artist, having established a workshop for clothes, paintings, 
pictures, metal statues etc. He spent five thousand coins to establish it. 
Whatever profit he made he used for worshipping the sun-God in the month 
of Magha (January-February) by performing sacrifices. Thus the sun-God 
Vishvakarma (the architect of the Gods) became pleased with this sacrifice 
and descended on the top of a big pillar in Pampasarovara, the lake named 
Pampa, having a brilliant shining form. At the noon time, Heli offered food to 
the sun-God according to his desire. In this way he satisfied the three worlds. 
After leaving his body he entered into the sun-planet. Therefore O king of 
devas you may worship the sun-God, he will help you. 
Suta said: Lord Indra hearing this from his guru, began to worship the sun-God 
Visvakarma along with other demiGods. Thus being pleased with their worship 
Tvashta (Visvakarma) said: O Gods, please listen to my words, I will appear in a 
village named Bilvagram in Bengal, and I will be the poet known as Jayadeva, 
the compiler of Nirukti. 
Saying this the sun-God went to Bengal and took birth in the house of a 
Brahmana named Kanduke. When he was just five years old, he was engaged 
in the service of his parents and continued for twelve years. After sometime 
his parents left their body and Jayadeva did all the final ceremonies 
(Shraddha) in Gaya. Being satisfied they went to heaven. 
Then Jayadeva lived in a jungle as a detached Brahmana. 
At the age of twenty three, a Brahmana (someone) offered his beautiful 
daughter to Lord Jagannatha. At the end of his worship the eternal Lord 
Aniruddha, having the form of Darubrahma, directly spoke thus: ‘O Satyavrata, 

1294 
 



please listen to Me, it is my order that you offer your daughter Padmavati to 
Jayadeva because he is the body of Mine, or he is as good as Me.’ Then he 
found the detached Brahmana (Jayadeva) and leaving his daughter in front of 
him, he went to his home. Padmavati served her husband for so many years 
accepting him as a beautiful and learned one. Jayadeva compiled a book 
known as Nirukta, the Vedic vocabulary, one of the six Vedangas. There were 
five kinds of Niruktas, but in Kali-yuga they were destroyed by the evil people 
and Prakrit-bhasha or the illiterate language was established. For the sake of 
the demiGods, Panini the author of Ashtadhyayi grammar, overtook them and 
established the pure Sanskrit languagae. 
Once the evil minded Kali situated in the hearts of thieves, plundered all the 
money of the Brahmana Jayadeva which was given to him by the king. 
Following this they cut both his hands and legs and went home leaving 
Padmavati aside. Jaydeva was thrown into a ditch. Padmavati took him out 
cried and lamented again and again seeing the situation of her husband. 
One day, when the king Dharmapala was out hunting. He saw the sage 
Jayadeva without hands and feet and asked: ‘Who put you in such a 
condition?’ Jayadeva answered: ‘No one put me in this condition, O king. It is 
due to my previous activities that I am suffering now in this abominable 
condition." Having heard this statement, the religious king put the Brahmana 
on a palanquin along with his wife and brought them to his palace. The king 
built a dharma-shala, religious institution, after receiving instructions from 
Jayadeva. 
One day those same thieves, dressed as Vaishnavas came to the king and said: 
‘We are very much expert in the scriptures and therefore we have come to 
you. O best of the kings, Lord Vishnu, while being in the stone (Shalagrama) 
eats food cooked by us everyday with love. If you don‘t believe us, you can see 
this right here.’ Saying thus the slaves of kali by their power showed the king a 
four handed form of Lord Vishnu eating. Being struck with wonder, king 
Dharmapala said to Jayadeva: ‘O my gurudeva, some vaishnavas, the devotees 
of Lord Vishnu have come to my palace, and they have shown me the Lord 

1295 
 



before my very eyes, therefore please come quickly." The theives saw 
Jayadeva and became struck with wonder. They said to the king in a joking 
mood: ‘O king, this Brahmana was a cook in the palace of the king of 
Gaudadesa (Bengal).  
Once he became very much greedy for money and he mixed some poison in 
the food and offered it to a king. When the king come to know about it he 
ordered him to be crucified. Then we came to him (Jayadeva), and knowing 
him to be an offender, we instructed him in the Vedic knowledge. Then the 
king refused to crucify him, but he cut off his hands and legs. At that time the 
king became our disciple, having been enlightened by us.’ While they were 
speaking thus, the earth broke in two and those thieves fell within the earth, 
being sent to the lowest hell known as patala-loka. Jayadeva began to cry to 
the thieves and while he was crying his hands and legs appeared to be as they 
were. Then he explained to the bewildered king what had happened. The king 
became very happy after hearing everything from him. Jayadeva wrote a song 
called Gita-Govinda, the song sung for the pleasure of Lord Govinda. The king 
read the song and attained liberation. ‘O Brahmanas, thus I have narrated the 
birth story of Jayadeva, now you listen about how the Supreme Lord appeared 
as Sri Krishna Chaitanya ." [From Pratisarga Parva, 4th Part, Chapter 6.] About 
Kutubuddin and the Shaws ruling Delhi. 
The sage (Saunka) said: ‘O great fortunate one, you know everything please 
tell us about the kings who came after Mahiraja. 
Suta Goswami said: The ghostly Kutukoddina, with human nature, was 
situated in the kingdom of Delhi. The best king Bhapasena, the grandson of 
Virasena was situated in the beautiful city of Aligarh. This city was protected 
by yadavas. Kutukaddin with tenthousand warriors went there and defeated 
him and returned to Delhi. Then so many kings form other countries came 
there and defeated him and rejected him from their countries. When 
Shahoddina heard this, he came to Delhi, conquered the kings and broke all 
the deities. After that so many mlecchas came from all sides and ruled the 
kingdom for 5, 6 or 7 years. They had destroyed the places of pilgrimage and 

1296 
 



the temples, therefore as a reaction they become short-lived. From today, the 
mleccha kings will continue for a hundred years, therefore O sages, you 
should quickly go to Vishala (Badarikashrama) with me. 
Then all the sages sadly left this place (Naimisaranya) and went to Vishala, the 
best of the Himalayas and meditated upon Lord Hari, being in samadhi 
(trance). And after a hundred years all of them attained the kingdom of God. 
Home  
  

1297 
 



18. BRAHMANANDA PURANA  
It is the eighteenth Purana. It has 1200 verses. Presently available in separate 
parts. We do not have the full text. Hence we have given the three important 
ones which we have:  
1. About the Mokshada Ekadasi. 
2. The Lalitopakhyanam about Devi Lalita Tripura Sundari. This also contains 
the Lalita Sahasranama Stotra and the Lalita Trishati Stotra, both of which are 
in our Stotras section. 
3. Also included is the The Sons of Sagara section - an interesting story by Rishi 
Jaimini according to which they dug into the earth to find a horse in Patala 
loka. A lot of people site this as an example to support the "hollow earth 
theory". 
This Purana has four parts- Prakriya, Anushanga, Upotaghat and Upasamhar. 
This Purana is said to be narrated by Sutaji on the bank of the river Drishdvati 
in Yaksh kshetra (identified with Sutlej in modern Himachal Pradesh). From his 
narration, it is clear that Sutaji had heard the Purana from Veda Vyasa who, in 
his turn, received it from Vayudev. 
Creation of the universe, determination of Kalpa, differentiation of Yugas, 
description of Manvantaras, description of Jambudweep and Bharatvarsh, 
description of Kimpurush. 
Anudweep, Ketumaal varsh etc. and description of Bharat vansha, Prithu 
vansha, Dev vansh, Rishi vansh, Agni vansh and preceptors are the main topics 
of Brahmand Purana. 
Sages, the dynasties of rulers and the legends of Pitas and their propitiation, 
the conflict between Karttikeya, King of Hihayas and Bhargava Parasurama.. 
Subsidiary episodes as that of Sagara, the lineage of Vaivasvata Manu and the 
dissolution of universe, the ultimate annihilation. 
Described in the Purana, Adhyatma Ramayana has seven parts. First part 
describes the Brahmaswarup (cosmic appearance) of Shri Rama. Incarnation 

1298 
 



of Lord Rama to relieve the earth from the atrocities of the demons. Baal-leela 
(childhood plays). Emancipation of Ahilya. Removal of Bhargava's 
(Parashuram's) ego. Second part contains: Lord Rama going into exile. Demise 
of Dashrath. Aranyakanda describes killing of the illusionary deer and 
abduction of Sita. Kishkindha khand describes the killing of Baali. Search of 
Sita. 
Sundar Khand has the tales of Hanuman's entry into Lanka. Lanka kanda 
contains the description of killing of Ravana and coronation of Lord Rama 
upon his return to Ayodhya. 
In Uttar Khand reasons for Ravana's birth have been described. It also contains 
the description of Sita’s desertion by Rama. Desertion of Lakshmana. 
Coronation of Luv and Kush and departure of Rama to his original Vaikunth 
loka. 
Lalitopakhyanam It is the most important section of this Purana. The narration 
is written in the form of conversation between Hayagreeva and the sage 
Agastya. Hayagreeva in this context is a seer. There is a celestial of the same 
name. Who are they? We get the reply for this also in the text.There is a 
detailed description in the book establishing the harmonious synthesis of the 
aspects of the three deities Shiva, Vishnu and the Divine Mother. In the past 
several devotees used to daily recite Lalitopakhyana, the detailed story of 
Lalita. This pious story contains the inner meanings of the several technical 
terms of the spiritual science and the finer aspects of the Mantra Shastra (the 
science of holy chants). Let us enjoy the feast of nectar by listening to this 
pious story with deep devotion. 
Penance of Agastya. Long ago, the mountain Vindhya (central India) started 
growing upward in gigantic proportion due to egoism. The sage Agastya 
decided to subdue the pride of Vindhya. For this purpose, he came from 
Varanasi (Uttara Pradesh, India) and settled in South India. By the divine 
presence of the sage Agastya, the entire SouthIndia gradually became 
prosperous and pious. Eventually the Kali Yuga started (As per the tradition of 
India, Kali Yuga is the fourth Age, the others being Kruta, Treta and Dvapara). 

1299 
 



In spite of the severe inspection ofthe sage Agastya, the evil traits of the Kali 
Yuga started sprouting slowly. Noting this trend, the sage felt sad and 
proceeded on a pilgrimage. The strange and unrighteous ways of the people 
made him quite unhappy. There was rampant selfishness and sensuousness 
prevalent everywhere. ‘How can thesepeople attain liberation?’ – This was his 
nagging grief. After reaching Kanchi (Tamil Nadu – South India) he was unable 
to bear the burden of the grief, and performed severe penance meditating on 
Varadaraja (The Best of the boon givers – a synonym of Vishnu). God‘s ways 
are mysterious! His power of illusion is incomprehensible! Vishnu appeared to 
the sage in the form of Hayagreeva. 
Agastya asked Hayagreeva ‘OhLord! What is the path of salvation to these 
ignorant people‖? Hayagreeva replied ‘There are two paths for this. They are: 
a) After renouncing everything, one can attain the knowledge of the, 
attributeless aspect of God. This is a very difficult way. 
b) The second method is to worship the Divine Mother who is the form of 
Vishnu with attributes. Even a sinner can do the worship. There is another 
advantage in this type. The devotee can simultaneously get enjoyment and 
salvation by following this path‖. Further, Vishnu ordered to the sage Agastya 
‘You have to propagate this divine secret in the entire world‖. 
The sage asked, ‘Lord Vishnu! Kindly narrate the story of Para Shakti (The 
UltimatePower, the Divine Mother) who is your aspect with attributes ‖. 
At this stage, Vishnu asked sage Hayagreeva (born with the Lord‘s aspects) to 
tell the detailed story to Agastya. 
"The Divine Mother emanated from meditation of Brahma (the Creator). Her 
name then was Prakruti (The nature). Mohini Avatara. For the second time, 
the Divine Mother manifested as Mohini at the time of the churning the ocean 
by the celestials and the demons (to obtain Amruta-nectar). Let us see how it 
happened. 
Once upon a time, Indra (the Lord of the Heaven was overpowered by the 
pride of his prosperity. His reverence to even Shiva gradually diminished. 

1300 
 



Observing this, Shiva asked the sage Durvasa to meet Indra in the Heaven. The 
sage started taking the path of Gandharvas (the celestial singers), which was 
very beautiful. The sage appeared uglier than a beggar. Anyway he proceeded 
ahead pompously. On the way the sage saw a celestial lady holding a fragrant 
garland of divine flowers. The ugly looking sage asked the beautiful lady, 
‘Where did you get this garland‖? She observed him keenly and realised that 
he was a sage. She prostrated to him and replied humbly ‘Sir! I am just now 
returning after doing the worship of the Divine Mother, who manifested and 
gave me this garland as Prasadam‖. Jumping joyously, the sage asked her to 
give the garland to him. She happily handed it over to the sage and, 
prostrated to him. The sage blessed her ‘May your devotion to the Divine 
mother be firm‖. 
Taking leave of the sage, she went away. By this incident, the sage realised 
that it was not difficult to others to recognise him, even if he was in any ugly 
appearance. He was satisfied with this thought and proceeded further. 
After a while, he saw Indra riding the elephant Iravata. The sage approached 
Indra, who did not appear to recognise and prostrate to the sage. However, 
the sage did not get angry and said, ‘Indra! This is the garland given by the 
Divine Mother Herself. Take it. 
Saying so, the sage presented the garland to Indra. Indra didn‘t refuse. He 
received the garland with disgust and threw the same on the head of the 
elephant, which proceeded ahead. A little latter, the elephant threw down the 
garland with its trunk and trampled over it. Looking at this, the sage Durvasa 
became very furious and cursed Indra, ‘Oh! Egoistic fellow! You have not 
recognised me. Not only that. You have not even respected the Prasadam of 
the Divine mother. Due to this, May your prosperity vanish!‖ With these 
words, Indra‘s pride was humbled. He got down the elephant and prostrated 
to the feet of the angry sage Durvasa. However, the sage went away silently. 
Then Indra‘s troubles started one by one. He saw bad omens in the Heaven. 
Afraid of them, Indra asked the sage Bruhaspati (the Spiritual Master of the 

1301 
 



celestials) to reveal the cause of the bad omens. The sage replied, ‘The effect 
of your sins follows you as a shadow. Saying so, the sage narrated a fine story. 
Long long ago, there was a thief by name Vajra in Kanchipuram (Tamil Nadu, 
South India). He used to steal small things and gradually amassed large 
quantum of money. As the wealth accumulated considerably, he wanted to 
hide it safely and went to the nearby forest to do so. In a dense part of the 
forest, he dug a deep pit and secured the money there in. However, a hunter 
by name Veeradanta, sitting on a tall tree observed all this, quite 
unexpectedly. After the thief has left the place, the hunter dug out the pit and 
after taking only one tenth of the money, he covered the pit, without causing 
any doubt to anyone. The hunter‘s wife saw the money and knowing how her 
husband got it, she said, ‘It is customary that many Brahmanas visit the home 
of my parents. Whenever they saw me, they used to forecast ‘You will get rich 
quite suddenly. Their prediction came true now‖. The hunter Veeradanta 
planned to purchase meat and wine with the money. 
However his wife said, ‘The Brahmana visitors of my parents‘ home used to 
tell something more. They cautioned that hard-earned money only will give 
durable enjoyment and that the easy money was sinful. Hence let us use this 
unexpected and unearned money for charities. After prolonged discussions, 
the wife‘s opinion won. Then Veeradanta selected a place of water scarcity 
and arranged the digging a big water tank for public use. While the work was 
in progress, further plans were made and accordingly, he started the 
construction of temples for Vishnu and Shiva by the side of the tank. When 
the projects were half way, the money was exhausted. Hence Veeradanta 
started spying to find out the several places at which the thief Vajra was 
hiding the stolen wealth. 
Without causing any doubt to the thief, the hunter used to take out money 
little by little from the pits and continued the construction without 
interruptions. Along with this, he started to donate the money. However the 
hunter did not use the money for himself or his family. Thus, constantly 
encouraged by his wife, his charities developed. The Brahmanas of Kanchi 

1302 
 



were glad and gave the titles ‘Dvijavarma‖ and ‘Shilavati‖ to the hunter and 
his wife. These titles eventually became their names in vogue. Some time 
later, the hunter planned and constructed a city. Instead of giving it his own 
name, the hunter named it as ‘Devaratapura‖, as a mark of respect to his guru 
‘Devarata‖. After a few years, the hunter and his wife died at the same time. 
The messengers of Yama (The God of death and the Lord of Hell), and Shiva 
and Vishnu arrived to takeaway the Jivas (the subtle form of life of the dead). 
Their debate as to who can take the Jivas could not be settled. At that time, 
the sage Narada arrived there. He asked the three groups of messengers to 
stop the arguments and revealed another aspect of the code of righteousness 
thus, ‘The hunter has performed the deeds of merit (Punya) like charities, with 
the money stolen by him. 
Hence as per the rules of righteousness, he must move about in the form of a 
ghost until the death of all the owners of the stolen wealth. Hence none of 
you have the right to take away the Jiva. ‘Next, his wife was great. She didn‘t 
commit any sin. As she was a devotee of Shiva, the messengers of the Lord 
can take away her Jiva. ‖Listening to this ruling, Shilavati‘s Jiva sat down 
obstinately, saying ‘I won‘t go to Kailasha, the abode of Shiva, leaving my 
husband in the form of a ghost‖. She prayed to the sage Narada, ‘Sir! Kindly 
direct me what I have to do to unburden my husband‘s sins‖. Narada was very 
much pleased with her chastity and fidelity and gave initiation of Shiva mantra 
(chant) to her. By her penance, the husband and wife attained the grace of 
Shiva and were accepted to stay in Kailasha (Shiva‘s abode). Sometime later, 
the thief Vajra and the persons from whom he stole the money died. All the 
Jivas reached the Hell, the abode of Yama, the God of death, He asked all of 
them to assemble and said, ‘Though you did not intend to do the acts of 
Punya (merit), they were performed with your money. Hence you are eligible 
to stay in Kailasha (abode of Shiva) for sometime. Hence I ask you whether 
you choose to experience either the effect of Punya (merit) or Papa (sin) in the 
first instance. They replied in chorus ‘we opt to experience the effect of merit 
first. By doing so, we will have a chance of association with the pious which in 
turn will wipe out past sins‖. Yama felt glad by their choice and sent them all 

1303 
 



as the attendants of Dvijavarma at Kailasha. By his good association, all their 
sins were washed off and they settled in Kailasha happily. 
Preaching of Bruhaspati. After narrating the story, Bruhaspati said, ‘Indra! 
Now you think of your sins‖. Indra once again prostrated to the sage and 
requested. ‘Sir! I am unable to realise my sins. Kindly give me details‖. 
Bruhaspati replied ‘In the distant past, ‗Diti‘, the second wife of Kashyapa 
gave birth to a son by name Danu and a daughter named Rupavati. Danu is the 
predecessor of the race of Danavas (demons). Rupavati was married to 
Brahma (the Creator). Her son was Vishwarupa. He did severe penance. He 
had many divine aspects. However he was a nephew of the demons. He was 
affectionate towards both the races – the celestials and the demons. After a 
while, Indra chose Vishwarupa as his Guru (at that time, Bruhaspati was not 
the Guru of the celestials). Indra expected that Vishwarupa would be partial 
towards the celestials and that he would destroy the demons. However 
Vishwarupa was friendly towards all. Observing this, Indra suspected that 
being a friend of the demons, Vishwarupa was harming the celestials. One 
day, Indra suddenly went to Vishwarupa and cut off all his three heads. By 
doing so, Indra was afflicted by the sin of Brahmahatya (killing Brahmana). Not 
only that. Aggrieved by the death of His son, Brahma (the Creator) cursed 
Indra. Terrified by these two (Brahmahatya and curse of Brahma), Indra 
accompanied by all the celestials, sought refuge at the feet of Vishnu, who 
contemplated deeply and allocated the effect of Indra‘s sins to the earth, the 
trees and the women. As compensation, Vishnu gave the power that the pits 
of earth could be filled up, the power that even the trees once cut off could 
revive and the power of women to beget children. 
Thus Indra was relieved of the effect of the sin of Brahmahatya (killing a 
Brahmin). 
However, the curse of Brahma (the Creator) still persisted. Vishnu called for 
Brahma and requested Him on behalf of Indra for relief from the curse. 
Brahma thought over the same and said, ‘OK. For the present my curse won‘t 
take effect‖. Vishnu said nothing. Again Indra became prosperous. However, 

1304 
 



very soon his pride increased. This time, Indra was affected by the anger of 
Shiva and so he was cursed by the sage Durvasa‖. 
Listening to all this, Indra recollected the past events and sadly asked 
Bruhaspati ‘Master! What have I to do now‖? When the guru was about to 
reply, a demon named Malaka invaded the Heaven with a huge army and 
seized the kingdom. Indra had to escape in a great hurry. He went straight to 
Brahma and prayed to Him for mercy, who also pitied Indra. However even 
the Creator could not decide what to do and approached Vishnu along with 
Indra and the celestials. 
Vishnu thought of the problem deeply and advised them, ‘You churn the 
ocean to get the Goddess of prosperity‖. 
For this purpose, Indra made reconciliation with the demons and taking their 
help, he and the celestials churned the ocean. During the churning, very 
valuable things emanated from the ocean. At last, Dhanvantari (the God of 
Healing) came out holding the pot of Amruta (nectar). Looking at him, the 
demons grabbed the pot and started running away with it. A bitter battle 
started between the celestials and the demons. There was utter confusion. 
Even Brahma and Shiva escaped and reached their abodes. Observing all this, 
Vishnu went to a secluded spot and started meditation of Sri Lalita Devi, who 
dwells within Him as the aspect of power. Due to this meditation he 
manifested as a form of Lalita Devi. Taking this incarnation as an embodiment 
of eroticism, Vishnu approached the celestials and demons. The celestials 
could realise the form as divine and auspicious. 
However, due to their predominating trait of Tamas (ignorance), the demons 
were enchanted by the beauty of the form and stopped fighting. She 
mesmerised them and took the pot of Amruta (nectar) from them, taking their 
consent to her to serve the nectar to all. She asked the celestials and the 
demons to sit in separate rows. She started to give the nectar to the celestials 
only first. Allured by her, the demons sat still stupefied. By the time the nectar 
was given to the celestials, the stock exhausted. She disappeared suddenly. 

1305 
 



The demons again started to fight with the celestials. However as the 
celestials have already drunk the nectar by then, the demons were defeated. 
Thus, the Divine Mother who manifested and enchanted the demons was 
called MOHINI (the divine enchantress). Shiva, staying in Kailasha came to 
know of these events and wanted to note the specialty of the new form of 
Vishnu. Along with his consort Parvati, Shiva went to Vaikuntha, the abode of 
Vishnu and pressed Him tos how the form of Mohini. Vishnu suddenly 
disappeared without saying yes or no. While Shiva was searching for Vishnu, 
he happened to reach a new place where he continued to search. 
There he heard the music of Veena. He saw a beautiful young lady. Unable to 
resist this infatuation, Shiva embraced her. At once a son was born. He was 
named SASTA (one who rules). He became a commander in Shiva‘s army. At 
once the lady disappeared. 
Shiva realised that she was none else than Mohini, a form of Vishnu. He 
applauded her beauty and returned to Kailasha along with Parvati. Thus the 
Divine Mother incarnated as Mohini and granted success of the activities of 
the celestials. 
Agastya heard the story and said, ‘Hayagreeva! Kindly let me know in detail 
which form of Para Shakti (The Divine Mother, the Supreme Power) will 
bestow both food and salvation to the devotees in the Kali Yuga‖. Hayagreeva 
replied, ‘Lalita Devi isthe only Goddess who has the power to do so. Listen to 
her story‖.In the distant past, Sati Devi, a daughter of Daksha was married to 
Shiva. 
However gradually, Daksha developed hatred towards Shiva. Due to this ill 
will, Daksha intended to perform a Yaga (fire sacrifice) without making any 
offering to Shiva. He didn‘t invite even his daughter Sati Devi to the Yaga. She 
came to know of the forth-coming great Yaga to be done by her father. She 
didn‘t know other details. However, overjoyed by the news of the ritual her 
father was going to perform, he went to the Yaga, in spite of Shiva‘s 
disapproval of her visit. Sati Deha Tyaga (Self-immolation of Sati) Ignoring the 

1306 
 



natural affection to his daughter, Daksha insulted her and repeatedly abused 
Shiva. 
Unable to bear the insult to Shiva, Sati Devi burnt her body in the fire created 
by her power of yoga. Knowing about this calamity, Shiva became furious. 
Creating the terrific Veerabhadra out of the locks of hair of His head, Shiva 
sent him to attack Daksha. 
Veerabhadra destroyed the hall of Yaga, swallowed even the Chakra (the 
circular weapon of Vishnu) and beheaded Daksha. The wives of Daksh aprayed 
to Veerabhadra who was pacified and revived Daksha back to life by joining he 
head of a goat to the trunk. Daksha repented and prayed to Shiva for pardon. 
Sati Devi was born as the daughter of Himavanta (Himalaya Mountain) and 
Menaka, as the couple did penance for 150 million years with the intention to 
beget her as their child. The newborn was named Parvati (daughter of 
Parvata-mountain) and brought Her up with love and affection. 
One day, the sage Narada visited Himavanta and said, ‘You are very fortunate. 
The Divine Mother is born as your daughter; Shiva is doing penance in your 
mountain range in his ‘Sthanu Ashrama‖ (abode of stones). After the 
departure of Sati Devi, He has become an ascetic. It will benefit you 
considerably if you send your daughter o serve Him‖. 
Himavanta‘s joy knew no bounds on hearing Narada‘s words. He went to the 
abode of Shiva along with his daughter. After taking Nandi‘s (the Ox which is 
the vehicle of Shiva) permission, he approached Shiva, worshipped Him and 
prayed to Him to allow Parvati to serve him. Shiva said, ‘OK. She may do so‖. 
Then onwards, Parvati used to render services to Shiva for hours together. 
However, Shiva used to be in a state of ecstasy of yoga continuously. Kama 
Dahana (Burning of Cupid) This being so, a demon by name Taraka invaded 
and occupied the Heaven along with his army and started to hurt and pester 
the celestials. All of them approached Brahma for relief, who said, ‘The son 
born to Shiva and Parvati only can kill the demon. Hence you make such 
efforts that the marriage will be performed‖. Indra, the Lord of the celestials 
called for Manmatha (Cupid - the God of love). He praised Cupid and asked 

1307 
 



him to see that Shiva‘s ascetic attitude was lessened and that He would start 
to love Parvati. 
Manmatha was exuberated by praises and agreed to do as directed. Rati Devi, 
the spouse of Manmatha came to know of this new assignment and tried her 
best to dissuade cupid from embarking on the hazardous venture. In spite of 
it, Cupid proceeded to Shiva‘s abode ‘Sthanu Ashrama‖. There he suddenly 
created the alluring atmosphere of the spring season. The Pramathaganas (the 
armies of Shiva) were very much disturbed in their minds with the erotic 
feelings. Observing this, Nandi (Ox-the vehicle of Shiva) disciplined them. In 
the meantime, Cupid entered the abode of Shiva stealthily and saw Shiva 
seated in the state of ecstasy of meditation. The very sight of Shiva in the 
posture suddenly unnerved Cupid. 
At the same moment, Parvati came there. Looking at Her, Cupid recovered his 
courage. 
While Parvati was getting up after bending low to prostrate to Shiva, Her 
uppergarment slipped a bit. Exactly at that moment, Manmatha aimed an 
arrow (of lust) on Shiva, whose mind was affected a bit. Observing this, Parvati 
feet a gush of joy inwardly. However Shiva analysed His feeling immediately 
and looked around to know why it happened so. 
Shiva saw Cupid hiding behind the bushes. At once, Shiva‘s third eye (in 
between the eyebrows) opened and the fire rushing there from reduced Cupid 
to ashes. Parvati closed her eyes out of fear. By the time She opened Her eyes 
in a moment, Shiva disappeared with all His attendants. Himavanta came 
there, consoled Her and took Her home. Rati Devi wept bitterly due to the 
death of her husband Manmatha. Vasanta, the God of spring approached Rati 
Devi, consoled her and reminded her of the curse of Brahma to Manmatha. 
Curse of Brahma to Manmatha. 
Once upon a time, there were two demons by name Sunda and 
Upasunda,who were brothers. They did penance meditating on Brahma and 
obtained a strange boon that their death could not be caused by anyone else 

1308 
 



except by themselves only. They were very much fond of one another. Hence 
they expected that no mutual harm would be possible. 
Thereafter they created havoc by their terrific acts in the three worlds. All the 
celestials prayed to Brahma who thought of a strategy to destroy the demons. 
He accumulated the essence of beauty of all the fine things in the world and 
created a woman of exquisite beauty. As she was created with a gingelly 
aspect of beauty in everything, she was called Tilottama (Tila-gingelly; 
Uttama-Best) Her beauty enchanted even the celestials. Brahma checked up 
keenly whether her beauty was superb in all aspects. Manmatha, who 
happened to be there at that time, wanted to play a practical joke. Hence he 
aimed an arrow (of lust) at Brahma. Due to this, Brahma forgetting that she 
was His daughter chased her lustily. As a last resort, Tilottama started running 
taking the form of a deer. 
Brahma also followed her in the form of a deer. The celestials were highly 
agitated by this untoward event. Observing this impending danger, Shiva 
manifested as a hunter and holding a bow and arrows came near Brahma who 
was in the form of a deer. Looking at the fierce form of Shiva, Brahma came to 
senses. He prostrated to His feet and prayed for pardon. By then, the 
celestials and Tilottama arrived there. Everyone was pacified. After taking 
Shiva‘s permission, the celestials sent Tilottamato meet Sunda and Upasunda 
looking at Tilottama going about in a garden, both Sunda and Upasunda 
competed to enjoy with her and at last the demons killed one another. 
Tilottama returned to Brahma, who felt happy and sent her to the Heaven 
with a permanent status as one of the Apsaras(celestial dancers). 
After the entire affair was over, Brahma recollected what all had happened 
and sent for Manmatha and said ‘You fellow! Blinded by the power bestowed 
to you, how dare you aim your arrows (of lust) at one and all, disregarding 
their age? Do you intend to destroy the code of righteousness? I am saved of 
grievous sin due to the timely arrival and protection of Shiva. Hence, one day 
you will be burnt to ashes by the fire of Shiva‘s third eye. Beware! ‖Hearing 
the curse, Rati and Manmatha were frightened and prayed to Brahma for 

1309 
 



relief of the curse. Brahma regained His composure and said, ‘The Divine 
Mother will manifest as Lalita Devi. She will marry Shiva. After the marriage, 
She will revive Manmatha to life‖ After narrating the story, Vasanta (the God 
of spring season) consoled Rati Devi, saying, ‘Sister-in-law! It is a must for 
everyone, however great he is, to undergo the suffering of a curse. However 
as predicted by Brahma, my brother Manmatha will be revived to life soon. 
Until then, be bold and continue to pray to Lalita Devi. Rati Devi left the place 
and followed the advice. 
Birth of Bhandasura. At this point of time, Chitrakarma, the commander of 
one of the Rudra Ganas (Gana = troupe) one day started toying with the ash of 
the burnt Manmatha and prepared a doll out of it. He took this doll to Lord 
Shiva. Lord Shiva‘s intentions are indeed unfathomable. As soon as the doll 
neared Lord Shiva, it sprang to life and the boy thus born prostrated before 
Lord Shiva and Chitrakarma. Chitrakarma was overwhelmed with joy. He gave 
the boy the Upadesha of Shata-Rudreeya Mantra and asked him to undertake 
penance. When the penance reached the stage of fruition, Lord Shiva 
appeared before him. He asked Lord Shiva to grant him a special boon 
‘Anyone who fights against me should immediately lose half of his strength 
and that strength should be added to my strength. None of the weapons of 
my opponents should be able to bind me‖ was his request. Immediately Lord 
Shiva granted the boon and added, ‘I am also bestowing on you the boon of 
ruling the kingdom for sixty thousand years‖. After giving these boons, Lord 
Shiva disappeared. He became surprised and a bit apprehensive by the words 
of Lord Shiva. But soon he forgot it. 
Lord Brahma, who was witnessing all this, grew frustrated and swore ‘Bhand‖ 
‘Bhand‖ (meaning shame, shame). From then on, he got the name ‘Bhanda‖. 
Because of his qualities he became an Asura (demon) and entered the domain 
of Asuras. This is how he got the name ‗Bhandasura‘. 
In the mean time, from the remnants of the ash of Manmatha were born two 
demons – Vishukra and Vishanga. These two became the main brothers of 
Bhandasura. In addition, thousands of Rakshasas (demons) were born out of 

1310 
 



the ash of Manmatha. All of them became followers of Bhandasura. They 
formed a strong army of 300 Akshouhinis (one Akshouhini consists of 21870 
elephants, 65610 horses and 109350 soldiers). Having come to know about 
the birth of thousands of Rakshasas, Shukracharya (the guru of Rakshasas) 
came there and assumed the role of the Guru for all those Rakshasas and 
initiated them to undertake regular Anushthanas (daily rituals). He also 
summoned Maya, the architect-builder of demons and asked him to create a 
new city in the province of Mahendra Mountains. He named the city as 
‗Shoonyaka Pattana‘ Shukracharya asked all the demons to move to the new 
city. He crowned Bhandasura as the king of the newly formed kingdom and 
made Vishukra and Vishanga the Yuvarajas (princes) of that kingdom. 
Bhandasura had four wives. 1. Sammohini, 2. Kumudini, 3. Chitrangi 4. 
Sundari. Under the guidance of Shukracharya, activities like fire sacrifices, 
Vedic education and penance went on uninterruptedly in every house. 
Tormenting of the three worlds: When the kingdom was well established, 
Bhandasura called for a meeting of his brothers and ministers and said: A) 
Devatas (Gods) are our enemies. As long as Manmatha was alive, their lineage 
continued without any problems. They also enjoyed many pleasures. 
B) Now, because of our luck, we have taken birth from the ashes of 
Manmatha. The Gods are trying to see that Manmatha is born again. We 
should not allow that to happen. Before they try anything like that, we should 
kill the Devatas. 
C) But, if we go in our present form, we can not win. Let us therefore assume 
the form of air and enter their bodies. D) After having so entered their bodies, 
let us dry up their body fluids, especially the semen. 
E) If semen dries up, the strength of other tissues and organs will 
automatically diminish.  Then they will automatically be annihilated. 
F) Let us torment the beings of all the three worlds by entering their bodies in 
the form of air and by drying up their body fluids. 

1311 
 



Hearing this, the entire army of the demons cheered with joy. Without 
wasting much time, Bhandasura and his army of 1000 Akshouhinis assumed 
the invisible form of air and entered the heaven. First of all, they entered the 
minds of the angels and dried up their mental faculties. Subsequently they 
entered the face of the angels, robbed them of their beauty and made them 
ugly looking. All the women and men in the heaven became impotent and 
sterile. Not only that, their love for one another was also lost. They lost 
enthusiasm to do anything. Even the plants and animals suffered the same 
fate. Vishukra, along with his troupes entered Bhooloka (earth) and meted out 
the same treatment to the beings there. People on the planet earth stopped 
smiling. They lost all happiness. No one had any respect for another. No one 
thought of helping the other. 
They lost interest in their activities. The situation was stone-like, devoid of any 
life and feelings. 
Vishanga, along with his troupes entered Rasaatala (one of the seven 
netherworlds). He created similar havoc there also. In the Naga Loka (land of 
serpents) everyone became afflicted with grief for no apparent reason. 
Everyone started hating everyone else. 
Everyone became drained of energy and potency. Rasa, the fluid principle is 
the basis for the accomplishment of the four-fold aims of life (Purusharthas). 
Let us see how. 
A. Rasa itself is the form of Paramatma, the Almighty. 
B. From Rasa are created Shukla (sperm) and Shonita (ovum). These two are 
collectively called as Veerya. 
C. From Veerya comes Kanti (radiance), Utsaaha (enthusiasm), 
Ullasa(happiness), Dharma (righteousness), Daya (compassion), Preeti 
(love),Buddhi (intellectual capabilities), Vikasa (development), Parakrama 
(valour)Shastra Vijnana (scientific knowledge), Kala Asakti (interest in arts), 
Soundarya Drishti (proper concept of beauty) etc. 

1312 
 



D. In plants, the Rasa enhances the fire energy, which is hidden in them. Only 
when the fire energy is harnessed, the plants can branch out and bear flowers 
and fruits. Because of this fire principle, the dried logs catch fire easily and 
burn. 
E. The Vedas have declared that beings can experience happiness only if 
Rasais present. 
F. Rasa is nothing but Prana (vital energy). G. Having known all these secrets, 
Bhandasura Devised the plan of entering the bodies of all beings in the form 
of air and drying them up. 
Vasanta, the close friend and associate of Manmatha observed this 
immediately and consoled Rati (Manmatha‘s wife). He said ‘Even the sun, the 
moon and the stars have lost their brilliance. Even Goddess Parvati seems to 
have become dull and has engaged in Tapas. Therefore, the day when your 
dead husband will come to life again is not very far. That day will come very 
soon. So, stop grieving.’ On hearing this, Rati Devi prepared to undertake 
penance. 
In the heaven, all the Devatas including Brahma, could not comprehend what 
was going on and what had caused the situation. Not knowing the remedy for 
their hardship, they approached Lord Sri Hari. When they finally reached the 
abode of Lord Sri Hari, they saw that even He was sitting still with his eyes 
closed. It appeared as though He was merged in the bliss of Sushupti. 
After the angels praised His glory for a long time, Lord Sri Hari slowly opened 
His eyes. 
What is this? Why are you all looking drained of your energies?’ asked Lord Sri 
Hari. He called everyone by their names and said:  
A. Your present condition is due to the invisible foul play of Bhandasura. 
B. Even I have lost the affinity for Goddess Lakshmi. What to say about other 
lesser beings? C. Myself, Brahma and Rudra are Karana Purushas (causal 
beings for the manifest creation). Even then, because we are also inhabiting 
this creation, even we can not escape the torture of Bhandasura. D. There is 

1313 
 



however one Almighty God who is beyond this manifest Brahmanda. He is 
called Maha Shambhu. Parashakti is constantly in His Company. E. He is devoid 
of form. He is not dependent on anything. He has nomodifications. He is 
greater than the greatest. He is the ultimate. 
F. He is not influenced by the foul play of Bhandasura, who is born from the 
ashes of Manmatha. G. He can rescue us from our difficulties. Therefore, let us 
all take refuge in Him and praise Him. Follow me. 
So saying, Sri Hari led all the angels to the brim of the Brahmanda (Universe). 
There was a huge wall like fence there. The angels summoned the celestial 
elephants to break the wall. After toiling continuously for one year, a breach 
was formed in the wall. After passing through the breach, they saw Chinmaya 
Akasha, which was Niralamba (independent), Nirajnana (untainted) and which 
was devoid of the five elements. They all stood in that Chinmaya Akasha and 
sang the glory of Maha Shambhu, who was of the form of Chidakasha. Then 
Maha Shambhu appeared before them. He was dark like clouds. He had two 
hands. He was holding a Shoola (spear) in one hand and a Kapala (skull) in the 
other. He had three eyes. Parashakti also appeared before them. She was 
holding Aksha Mala (rosary of beads) and Pustaka (book) in Her hands. She 
was bright and cool like the moon. 
The great Maha Shambhu smiled and said  
A. I am aware why you have all come here. 
B. Pralaya (destruction) is of three types. (i) Avaantara Pralaya (ii) Maha 
Pralaya and (iii) Kama Pralaya. 
C. I am the one who is responsible to rescue the world from Maha Pralaya. 
Vishnu is the one who rescues from Aavantara Pralaya. It is Lalita 
Parameshwari who rescues from Kama Pralaya. 
D. These three kinds of Pralaya take place in a cyclic pattern in every Kalpa. 
Now, Kaamika Pralaya has taken place because of the destruction of Kama and 
subsequently due to the actions of Bhandasura. 

1314 
 



E. Only Lalita Devi can rescue from this situation. Parashakti alone can create 
another Lalita Devi. Therefore, take shelter in her. Beg her to help you. 
Hearing this, the Devatas did not know what to do. They again prayed to 
Maha Shambhu to teach them the method of appeasing Parashakti. 
Maha Shambhu explained: A. This is called as Maha Yaga. (great fire sacrifice) 
B. I am (assuming the form of Vayu) the Hota (the priest who makes the 
offerings in a Homa) in this Yaga (fire sacrifice). 
C. My Chidagni itself is the fire in this Yaga. 
D. The last of the seven seas, i.e., Jala Samudra (Water Sea) has now dried up. 
The huge pit so formed itself is the Homa Kunda (fire pit where Homa is 
performed) E. The remaining six great oceans constitute the six drops of ghee 
which is used as offering. 
F. Srishti (creation) is of five types (i) Manasa Srishti (ii) Jarayavee Srishti 
(creation-taking place through the womb. 
G. Human beings), (iii) Anda Srishti (creation taking place through eggs) (iv) 
Swedaja Srishti (creation taking place through sweat) and (v) Udbhijja Srishti 
(creation taking place by sprouting). These five Srishtis (creations) are the 
sacrifice animals in this Maya Yaga.G. Bhoomi (land), Parvata (mountains), Jala 
(water), Vayu (air) and Akasha (space) these five are the substances used in 
this fire sacrifice. Agni element (one of the five elements) being a part of my 
Chidagni can not be a substance to be offered. 
H. At the end of this great fire sacrifice, all of you (the performers of the Yaga) 
should jump in to the Homa Kunda (fire pit). While doing so, you must possess 
absolute devotion. 
I. Then, Lalita Parameshwari will manifest. 
J. She will be seated in a chariot called Chakra Raja Ratha. 
K. She will create Parabrahma in the name of Kameshwara and will have Him 
as Her consort. 

1315 
 



L. This couple will re-create the entire universe, which will turn out to be more 
beautiful than the previous creation. 
M. Lalita Parameshwari will bring Manmatha back to life. 
N. She will create four weapons, namely (i) Ikshu Dhanus – a bow of sugarcane 
(Mano roopekshu kodanda – is one of the 1000 names of Goddess Lalita) (ii) 
five Pushpa Banas – flower arrows (Pancha tanmatrasaayaka is one of the 
1000 names), (iii) Paasha – noose (Raaga svaroopapaashaadhyaa – is one of 
the 1000 names of Lalita) and (iv) Ankusha (a hook, especially an elephant 
driver‘s hook) (Krodha-akaaran kushojjvala is one of the descriptions of Lalita) 
O. With the help of these weapons, she will destroy Bhandasura. 
P. She will bring Manmatha back to life. 
Q. She will give you fresh bodies. 
R. If you all agree, I will begin this great sacrifice myself. 
The angels became very pleased and begged Maha Shambhu to be the Hota 
and carry on the sacrifice. Parashakti and Maha Shambhu disappeared. The 
angels also returned to their abode. 
After some time, Maha Shambhunatha, accompanied by Parashakti started 
chanting the Lalita Maha Mantra and entered the Universe in the form of the 
seven-layered Vayu (air). 
Parashakti assumed the form of His Kriya Shakti (energy of action). With the 
help of Kriya Shakti, Vayu blew the Jala Samudra with all his energy. The Jala 
Samudra (water ocean) became totally dry. In the pit thus formed He kindled 
the Chidagni with the help of fire emanating from the third eye. This Agni 
raged from the Patala (a region in the netherworld) to the Brahma Loka. He 
decorated the periphery of the Homa Kunda with the stars just as one 
decorates a sacrificial fire pit with flowers. After this, he performed the Yaga 
as ordained by the Vedas. He used the Pralaya Meghas (clouds appearing 
during Pralaya), namely Pushkala and Aavartakaas Srik and Sruva (the two 
spoons which are used to offer ghee in fire worship). As the Homa progressed, 
the Chidagni emanating from it spread to vast area. He then offered the first 

1316 
 



six oceans and then the five-fold creations to this Agni. In the end, the Gods 
too decorated themselves and sat on the Srik and Sruva, ready to be offered 
to Agni. Maha Shambhunatha offered them to Agni. After this, Maha 
Shambhunatha discarded his Vayu form and assumed his real form. He then 
chanted 8 special mantras and performed 8 Homas. 
Manifestation of Lalita Devi. At the end of the Homa, Lalita Devi came out of 
the Chidagni Homa Kunda, seated on a special chariot called ‘Chakra Raja 
Ratha‖. 
Therefore, we find the descriptions such as ‘Chidagnikunda sambhoota‖ ‘Deva 
kaarya samudyataa‖ and ‘Chakra Raja Rathaa Roodha Sarvaayudha 
Parishkritaa‖ in Lalita Sahasranama. The Sri Chakra Raja Ratha had the 
following dimensions: A. Width 4 Yojana (1 Yojana is approximately  9 miles) 
B. Height  10 Yojanas C. Parvas (landings)  9 in number D. Chakras (wheels) – 
the four Vedas. 
E. Horses – the four-fold aims (Purusharthas) F. Flag absolute bliss. 
G. The seat at the topmost landing is the Bindu Peetha. 
H. Form - of the form of Meru Prastara. 
I. The material that was used to make this was ‗Tejas‘. 
The Lalita Parameshwari so manifested, created a male form from within 
Herself. His name was Kameshwara. By her power of will, she created 4 
different weapons. They were (i) Ikshu Dhanus (ii) Five arrows, (iii) Pasha 
(noose) and 4 Ankusha (a special hook). 
She held all these weapons in her hands. We see the description – 
‘Chaturbahu samanvitaa‖ in the Lalita Sahasranama. She was shining like the 
morning sun, with crimson color. (Udyad bhanusahasraabhaa is a description 
found in Lalita Sahasranama). 
Her beauty was full in all aspects. (Sarvarunaanavadyangee 
sarvaabharanabhooshitaa – Lalita Sahasranama). She always appears as 
though she is 16 years of age. (Nityaa shodashikaaroopaa is a description in 

1317 
 



Lalita Sahasranama. This description has two meanings. One meaning is that 
she always appears as one who is sixteen years of age. 
The other meaning is, there are 16 Nityaa Devis. She is of the form of these 16 
Nityaa Devis. Maha Shambhunatha praised Her in many ways. Order of 
Creation. She extended Herself in both male and female forms and continued 
the process of creation. 
A. From the left eye, which was of the nature of Soma (moon) came 
Brahmaand Lakshmi Devi. 
B. From the right eye, which was of the nature of Soorya (sun) came Vishnu 
and Parvati. 
C. From the third eye, which was of the nature of Agni (fire), came Rudra and 
Sarasvati. 
D. Lakshmi & Vishnu, Shiva & Parvati and Brahma & Sarasvati became couples. 
E. Lalita Devi directed them to continue the process of Creation. She herself 
continued to create certain things. (i) From her long hair she created darkness. 
(ii) From her eyes, she created the sun, the moon and the fire. (iii) From the 
pendent hanging in front of her forehead came the stars (iv) From the chain 
above her forehead came the nine planets. 
(v) From the eyebrows, she created the penal code. (vi) From her breath, she 
created the Vedas. (vii) From her speech, she created poetry and plays. (viii) 
From her chin she created the Vedangas. (ix) From the three lines in her neck, 
she created various Shaastras. (x) From her breasts, she created 
mountains.(xi) From her mind, she created the power of bliss. (xii) From her 
fingernails, she created the 10 incarnations of Vishnu. 
(xiii) From her palms, she created the Sandhyas. (xiv) She created other things 
as narrated in the Purusha Sookta. (xv) From her heart, she created Baalaa 
Devi. (xvi) From her intellect, she created Shyamala Devi. (xvii) From her ego, 
she created Vaaraahi Devi. (xviii) From her smile, she created 
Vighneshwara.(xix) From the Ankusha (a special hook), she created 
Sampatkaree Devi. 

1318 
 



(xx) Form the noose, she created Ashwaa Roodha Devi. (xxi) From her cheeks, 
she created Nakuleshvari Devi. (xxii) From her Kundalini Shakti, she created 
Gayatri. (xxiii) From the eight wheels of the Chakra Raja chariot, she created 8 
Devatas.(xxiv) In the 9th landing, in the Bindu Peetha, she herself was seated.  
(xxv) Afterwards, she created the Devatas who would protect the Chakra 
Rajachariot. After having thus completed the great creation, Lalita Devi 
requested her consort, Shiva Kama Sundara to created the Shiva Chakra. He 
immediately brought out a big humming sound and from this, the Shiva 
Chakra Devatas numbering 23 manifested. Later, Lalita Devi crowned 
Shyamala Devi as the prime minister. Therefore Shyamala Devi is called 
Mantrini Devi. Lalita Devi handed over the finger ring to Mantrini Devi. 
She made Vaartaalee Devi the chief of her army. Therefore Vaartaalee Devi is 
also called as Dandanaathaa Devi. She is also called as Vaaraahee Devi. Lalita 
Devi created a mace (a weapon) from her eye brows and gave it to 
Dandanathaa Devi. After this, Lalita Devi created two chariots from her chariot 
and gave them to Mantrini Devi and Dandanatha Devi. Mantini Devi‘s chariot 
is called ‘Geya Chakra Ratha‖. This chariot used to make musical sounds 
whenever it moved. Dandanatha Devi‘s chariot is called ‘Kiri Chakra Ratha‖. 
Later, Lalita Devi hummed with rage. From this hum, 64000000 Yoginis were 
born. Another 64000000 Bhairavas were also born. Innumerable Shakti Senas 
(armies) were also created by her hum. 
Devi vijaya yatra (Devi’s victory procession) Later Lalita Devi, making the noise 
emanating from the four oceans as the drums and accompanied with several 
other instruments proceeded for the battle against Bhandasura. From Lalitha 
Devi‘s Ankusham (=spear), ‗Sampat karidevi‘, came out along with crores and 
crores of elephants and started following Lalita Devi (sampatkarisamarudha 
sindhura vraja sevita). Sampatkari Devi was sitting on the elephant named 
‗Ranakolahalam‘ (=battlebustle, battle uproar). 
From Lalita Devi‘s Pasham (=whip) arose Ashwaroodha Devi along with a big 
army of horses and was moving in front of Lalita 
Devi.(ashwarudhadhishtishtaswa koti kotibhiravruta) . The horse carrying 

1319 
 



Ashwaroodha Devi was named ‗Aparajitam‘ (=one whichcannot be defeated). 
Later , commander of the army Dandanatha Devi played the drums to 
startmarching. As the march started Dandanatha Devi got down from her 
chariot and sat down on the lion. The lion is named ‗Vajraghosham‘ 
(kirichakra ratha rudha damdanadhapuraskruta). All her soldiers started 
praising her by twelve different names. 
(Panchami dandanatha cha sakjeta samayeshwaritatha samaya sakjeta varahi 
potrini tathavartali cha maha sena pyajna chakreshwari tathaarighni cheti 
samproktam nama dwadasakam yune). Later Mantrini Devi played the drums 
of marching. Her soldiers were mainly decorated sensuously. They were 
playing veenas and singing. Mantrini Devi was moving in her Geyachakra ratha 
(circle of army formed by singers) [geyachakra ratha rudha mantrini 
parisevita). She was being praised by sixteen names. (Sangeeta yogini shyama 
shyamala mantra nayikamantrini sachiveshani pradhaneshi shukapriyavina 
vati vainiki cha mudrini priyakapriyanipapriya kadambeshi kadamba 
vanavasinisadamada cha namani shodashaitaini kumbhaja) One who recites 
this strotra can conquer all the three worlds. 
Then, from the bird in the hands of Mantrini Devi, appeared God Dhanurveda 
with a spectacular bow in his hand and said ‘Mother! this bow is called 
chitrajeevam. This quiver is akshaya (=one which is unlimited, fills up 
spontaneously). Please accept them for demolishing the demons.’ Now Lalita 
Devi started moving with sugarcane, bow, arrows, spear and whip in the 
‗srichakraraja‘chariot. She is being praised with 25 names - simhasanesi 
lalitha maharajni varankusha sundari chakranathacha samrajni chakrini 
rathachakreshwari mahadevi kameshi parameshwari kamaraja 
priyakamakotika chakravartini mahavidya shivananga vallabha 
sarvapatalakulanatha amnayanatha sarvamnaya nivasinishringara nayika cheti 
panchavimshati namabhih. One who recites this stotra attains ashta siddhi (8 
spiritual accomplishments) Bandasura vadhodyukta Shaktisena samanvita in 
Lalita sahasranama stotram means one who is ready with her army (shakti 
sena) to annihilate Bhandasura. Bhanda’s war preparation: While Lalita Devi 

1320 
 



was proceeding for the war, many bad omens were observed in Bhanda‘s 
‗Shunyaka‘ town. Bhandasura called upon an urgent meeting along with his 
brothers Vishukra and Vishanga to assess and evaluate the situation. In the 
meeting Vishukra spoke thus: a.) All Gods have burnt themselves by jumping 
into fire, out of despair. 
b.) From that fire arose mother Goddess, who rejuvenated all Gods c.) She is 
coming for a war with us, along with an army of women d.) Those Gods are 
trying to cut stones using tender leaves e.) Even then we should not neglect 
that woman. We must send our army immediately. 
Vishanga said:  
a.) Any work should only be done after properly thinking about it. 
b.) First we must send spies and see how powerful their army is. 
c.) We must not under estimate the enemies army. 
d.) In the past Hiranyakashipa was killed by an animal. 
e.) Sumbha and Nishumbha were killed by a woman. 
f.) So, we must get more information about her g.) Who is she? Who is 
supporting or protecting her? What does she want? All these queries should 
be answered. 
Listening to this Bhandasura shuddered at the proposal with a sarcastic grin. 
"Even if all the Gods are behind her, we have nothing to fear. Do not entertain 
such useless thoughts and spoil your mind". 
Immediately Bhandasura ordered ‗Kutilaksha‘, Commander-in-chief of his 
army, to protect the fort. He ordered the priests and ministers to perform 
abhichara (black magic) homa. 
He ordered Lalita to be dragged to him holding her hair. Now, the demons 
played the war drums. Kutilaksha sent the first batch of army with demon 
Durmada as the commander..At Shunyapura Kutilaksha made arrangements 
for protection - Eastern entry _ Tala jangha, Southern entry - Tala bhuja, 
Western entry -- Talagriva, Northern entry - Tala ketu were placed along with 

1321 
 



10 akshohini army each. For each corner of the town another 10 akshohini 
was allocated for protection. 
Shakti senas’s uproar. Durmada was confronted by Sampatkaridevi and her 
army of elephants (who arose from Lalita Devi‘s spear). Realising that his army 
was being defeated Durmada himself came for the war seated on a camel. 
Sampatkari Devi who was seated on ‗Ranakolahala‘ her elephant, faced him. 
In the ferocious battle Durmada was able to destroy one gem from the crown 
of Sampatkari Devi. Angry with this, Sampatkari Devi killed Durmada with her 
arrows which pierced his heart. With that the remaining demons fled back to 
their town out of fear. 
Listening to this Bhandasura was very angry and sent Durmada‘s elder brother 
Kurunda for battle. He is an expert in maya yuddha (war using mystical 
powers). Full of vengeance he attacked Sampatkari Devi. In the meanwhile 
Ashwarudha Devi who had taken birth from Lalita Devi‘s whip came forward 
and pleaded Sampatkari Devi to give her a chance to fight with this demon. 
Now Ashwarudha Devi along with her army pounced upon Kurunda. 
Ashwarudha Devi mounted on ‗Aparajita‘ was herself leading the army. In 
that battle she killed Kurunda by piercing his chest with her spear. Remaining 
demonsfled for their lives. 
Bhanda became furious. He sent a huge army this time (100 akshohini) along 
with 5 commanders. They materialised serpent Gods by name ‗Ranashambari‘ 
which attacked Shaktisena. The demons had previously defeated Gods using 
these mystic powers. Crores and crores of serpents, which arose from the 
serpent Gods, started torturing the Shaktisena. They were taking birth again 
and again even after being killed a number of times. Then Nakuli Devi 
mounted on garuda came to the battlefield. From her mouth came out 32 
crores of mongooses. These mongooses started gobbling up all the newborn 
serpents immediately after birth. Then Nakuli Devi killed Ranashambari with 
Garudastram. 

1322 
 



All the five commanders now attacked Nakuli Devi. Nakuli Devi‘s mongoose 
army attacked them from the rear. In that ferocious battle Nakuli Devi who 
was mounted on Garuda was making aerial strikes on the demons who were 
not able to catch her. She killed the five commanders by chopping of their 
heads. 
Bhanda after listening to this sent Valahaka and other seven commanders 
along with 300 akshohini army. These seven demons are sons of demoness 
named Kikasa. In the past they obtained a boon from sun God that at the time 
of war sun would reside in theireyes. 
As soon as these demons entered the battlefield the Shakti sena army started 
becoming blindfolded and incapacitated unable to face the brilliance of their 
eyes. Demons started becoming ferocious. Immediately the bodyguard of 
Dandanatha Devi –named Tiraskarinika Devi, entered the battle field mounted 
on an aeroplane named ‗Tamoliptam‘.At the order of Damdanatha Devi she 
discharged an arrow named ‗Andhanastra‘ and the seven commanders were 
forced to close their eyes. Now Shakti sena started pouncing back. Keeping 
Tiraskarinika Devi in the forefront, other Gods killed the sevencommanders. 
With this blow Bhandasura lost his senses. He called upon his two brothers for 
a discussion. 
In that meeting it was decided that Vishanga would attack Devi‘s army from its 
rear side in a treacherous way (This is called Parshti grahamu). This decision 
was taken because they got information from their spies that Lalita Devi was 
having less army and protection at her rear end and it was easier for them to 
approach Lalita Devi directly and attack her, if they approached from the rear. 
After the first day‘s war, at dusk, Vishanga with a small army proceeded to the 
rear of Lalita Devi‘s army noiselessly without any drums. By then Lalita Devi‘s 
army was moving westward. Vishanga along with his army moved north wards 
and then turned to reach eastern side. He was able to see Srichakraraja 
chariot very near to him. Lalita Devi was looking forward observing the 
movement of the army. 

1323 
 



She was not having much army close to her. Taking this opportunity Vishanga 
attacked Devi‘s chariot from the rear, all of a sudden. 
Anima and other Gods who were present there were taken back at this 
sudden attack but quickly recovered themselves and prepared for a counter 
fight. Exactly at the same time Kutilaksha along with ten akshohini army 
attacked from the front side. Seeing attack from both ends Lalita Devi was a 
little angry. In the mean while, struck by an arrow from Vishanga, the fan 
present in Lalita Devi‘s hand fell down andbroke. Seeing this Tithidevatas got 
very angry. They went and requested Lalita Devithat Vahnivasini and 
Jwalamalini nitya devas have property and capacity of self illumination. If they 
glow then the demons who are in the dark will all becomevisible. With the 
permission of Lalita Devi, Vahnivasini and Jwalamalini Devis started glowing 
like fireballs. All the demons who were hiding in darkness now becamevisible. 
Now the 16 nitya Devi‘s became outrageous and attacked Vishanga‘s army. All 
the commanders in the demons army died. Wounded all over the body 
Vishanga fled for his life shamelessly. Even Kutilaksha who attacked from the 
front also fled. (In Lalita sahasranama - nityaparakrama topa nirikshana 
samatsuka =seeing the valour of nityadevatas, Lalita Devi was very pleased). 
Mantrini Devi and Dandanatha Devi felt unhappy about this unprecedented 
attack in the night They felt very sorry that their arrangements of protection 
were not up to the mark. Agni prakara (compound wall made of fire). Both of 
them went to Lalita Devi, expressed sorry for what had happened and made 
arrangements for protection. At the instance of Lalita Devi, Jwalamalini Devi 
made a compound wall of fire around the Devi‘s army The fire wall is 100 
yojana wide and 30 yojana tall. 
(1 yojana is approximately 8 miles). At the southern end of fire wall is a 1 
yojana long entry, to enable Devi‘s army to go out and fight because 
Shunyapuram is facing this end. (L.S.N—jwalamalinikashipta 
vahniprakaramadhyaga)Stambhini Devi a member of Dandanatha Devi family 
along with 20 akshohinisenas was protecting this entry point. She is also called 
Vighna Devi. By then it was dawn. 

1324 
 



Knowing all this news Bhandasura was in despair and started thinking what to 
do. This time he sent all his 30 sons for the war. After listening to this news 
Lalita Devi‘s daughter Baladevi wanted to fight these demons herself. Baladevi 
is the only daughter of Lalita Devi .She resembles Lalita Devi very much but is 
always only years old .She stays permanently with her mother.. Baladevi 
approached her mother and requested for permission to fight in 
thebattlefield.. At the outset Lalita Devi denied but looking at the courage and 
will power exhibited by Bala Devi she ultimately gave permission. Seeing Bala 
Devi coming for the war Mantrini and Dandanayaka were astonished and they 
stood as her body guards. Now Baladevi started ferocious fighting with 
Bhanda‘s sons. Every one was surprised at her valor. Whole of the second day 
Baladevi fought. That evening she shot 30 arrows at a time and killed the 30 
sons of Bhanda. 
Lalita Devi was very happy and she embraced her daughter (Bhanda putra 
vadhodyukta bala vikrama nandita). 
Bhanda was grief stricken. Desperately he himself started off for the war. 
Vishukra and Vishanga pacified Bandasura. 
Vighnayentra nashnam (Destruction of the mystic symbol of obstacles). Now 
Bhanda sent Vishukra to the warfront. In the darkness Vishukra approached 
the Vahniprakara (firewall) –on a flat stone he drew a mystic symbol and 
performed some black magic. He then threw that mystic symbol forcefully. It 
fell in the firewall at some point. With the affect of that yantra (mystic 
symbol) laziness crept into the minds ofthe Devi‘s army. Some started arguing 
that war itself was wrong. (b.) Some said, ‘Why should we fight on behalf of 
the Gods‖. (c.) Some said, ‘Who is this Lalita Devi? Who has given her superior 
ship over us?’ (d.) Some said, ‘If all of us together decline not to fight what can 
Lalita Devi do?’ (e.) All of them fell into sleep of ignorance. After midnight 
Vishukra along with 30 akshohini sena surrounded the firebarrier. Even then 
none of the members of Shakti sena moved under the influence of the 
ignorance caused by the Vighna yantra. However, Vighnayentra was not able 
to affect Mantrini and Dandanatha. But they were both very sad worried 

1325 
 



seeing the state of their army. Not knowing what to do they went and 
enquired Lalita Devi. Then Lalita Devi looked at the Kameshwara‘s face and 
passed a gentle smile. From her smile Ganapathi took birth. He immediately 
searched in the firewall and noticed the ‗vighnayentra shila‘ at one place. He 
broke the shila into pieces and powder with his tooth.(kameshwaramukhaloka 
kalpita sri ganeshwara Mahaganesha nirbhinna vighnayentra praharsita). With 
that Shaktisena‘s ignorance and sleep was dispelled, they immediately got 
ready for the war. Now Vighneswara along with this army came out of the fire 
barrier and started fighting with Vishukra. 
Vishukra sent Gajasura to attack him but soon Gajasura was slayed. Seeing 
this Vishukra ran away. 
Annihilation of Vishukra and Vishanga. After discussing with Bhandasura, 
Vishukra came back to war, along with his brother Vishanga and son-in-law. 
With this the third day war had started. Mantrini and Dandanatha both 
started to fight simultaneously. In the front was Dandanatha Devi mounted on 
her kirichakra ratha with her plough weapon (halayudha) swirling it rapidly. 
Behind her was Mantrini Devi mounted on Geyachakra ratha as an archer with 
bow and arrows. Dandanatha Devi attacked Vishunga. Mantrini Devi 
confronted Vishukra.. Ashwarudha, Sampatkari and others attacked the son- 
in-law of the demons who had come..The army of the demons started 
slackening. Noticing this Vishukra discharged Trushastram (weapon which 
produces thirst). Shaktisena‘s army started to experience intense thirst. Then 
Dandanatha Devi invited ‗Madyasamudra‘(=ocean of liquor) devata from her 
kirichakra and quenched their thirst. 
Madyasamudra deva showered liquor rains. With that the army quenched 
their thirst and rejuvenated.. By sunset most of the demons including 
Bhanda‘s son-in-law had died. 
Then Shyamala Devi (Mantrini) fought with Vishukra and killed him with 
‗Brahmashironamakastra‘ (a powerful weapon named Brahmashira). 
Dandanatha Devi (Potrini) killed Vishanga with her plough weapon and pestle. 
However in Lalita sahasranama it is mentioned that Vishukra was killed by 

1326 
 



Varahiand Vishanga was killed by Mantrini-Mantrinyamba virachita vishanga 
vadhatoshitaVishukra prana harana varahiveryanandita. By then it was past 
midnight. 
Only Kutilaksha the commander in chief was left over to console Bhandasura. 
Bhanda along with Kutilaksha started towards the battlefield. 2185 akshohini 
army along with 40 commanders followed him. 
A). He boarded a chariot named ‗Aabhilamu‘(=dreadful). It is dragged by 1000 
lions instead of horses. 
B). His sword is named Yatana (= torture in hell). 
Noticing this Lalita Devi herself started moving in her Srichakra raja ratha 
towards the warfront. Behind her was Mantrini in the Geyachakra ratha 
followed by Potrini in kirichakraratha. Other Shakti deities followed her in 
crores. In the usage of sastra‘s (mystic weapons) and pratyastra 
(corresponding neutralising weapons), none of them were drawn aback 
(LSN—Bhandasurendra nirmukta shastra pratyastra varshini) Now Bandasura 
by his mystical powers regenerated Madhukaitabha, Raktabija and other old 
demons. Then Lalita Devi made a violent frenzied laughter –Durga Devi and 
other deities described in Chandi Saptashati were born and slayed these 
demons. Now Bhanda generated Somaka and other demons. Then Lalita Devi 
generated the 10 incarnations of Vishnu from the finger tips of her hands (LSN 
– Karanguli nakhotpanna narayana dasakrutih). Sun was about to set. Lalita 
Devi decided not to delay any more. She then discharged Narayana astra and 
Pashupata astra and destroyed the demons and their commanders who were 
all turned into ashes (Mahapashupatastragni nirdagdhasura sainyaka). Now 
Bhandasura was the only one left. Lalita Devi discharged the 
Mahakameshawarastra and annihilated Bhandasura. Immediately his 
Shunyaka town got burnt down. (Kameshwarastra nirdagdhasabhandasura 
sunyaka. 
Gods proclaimed victory of Lalita Devi on the drums and they showered 
flowers, lighted camphor blazes and shouted victory slogans. 

1327 
 



Kama sanjeevanam (rebirth of kama). Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and other Gods 
praised Lalita Devi‘s grandeur (LSN—Brahmopendra mahendradi deva 
samstuta vaibhava). In that praise they proclaimed thus:  
A.) Mother! Bhanda is dead but his friend Taraka is still alive to trouble us. 
B.) To annihilate him Shiva must have a son  
C.) We were trying for the same but in the mean while Manmadha (God of 
love) died and all these events happened  
D.) Therefore kindly give rebirth to Manmadha and perform the marriage of 
Shiva and Parvathi. 
Lalita Devi smiled compassionately and looked at Kameshwara. From her looks 
Manmadha took rebirth. (Haranetragni sandagdha amasanjeevanaushadhih - 
meaning Lalita Devi is the sacred herb sajeevini which gave rebirth to 
Manmadha who was destroyed by the fire from Shiva‘s eye). Rati and 
Manmadha prostrated to the mother Goddess and praised her. 
The mother Goddess blessed them and instructed:  
A.) Manmadha! Now you need not fear  
B.) Go once again and cast your magical arrow on Shiva  
C.) Shiva will loose to you and will marry Parvathi  
D.) With my blessings Shiva will do you no harm. 
E.) From now on you can enter every ones body and cause aesthetic/ 
sensuous pleasures to them. 
F.) Protect my devotees. 
At the instructions of mother Goddess Manmadha with his family went and 
cast his magic charm on Shiva. This time Shiva left renunciation and started 
searching vehemently for Parvati. Then Manmadha cast magical arrows on 
Parvati also. Shiva was very pleased with Parvati‘s penance. He appeared 
before her, granted a boon and married her. 

1328 
 



Kumaraswamy was born to Shiva and Parvati. He became the commander of 
Gods army and annihilated Tarakasura. He then married Devasena Devi, the 
daughter of Indra. 
After helping all the Gods Manmadha left to Sripura to serve Goddess Lalita 
Devi. 
Sripura varnanam (description of Sripura ) What does Sripura mean? After the 
annihilation of Bhandasura, Trimurtis called upon the cosmic architect 
Viswakarma and the architect of demons Maya , and instructed them to 
construct 16 palaces in 16 kshetras (sacred places) for the residence of Lalita 
& Shiva Kameswara. Meru and other gigantic mountains (9) Jalasamudra and 
other oceans (7) – total 16 Kshetras. The palatial buildings of mother Goddess 
located in these kshetras are called Sripura. Wherever a Sripura is located , its 
dimensions are like this. 
1.) Mount Meru has 4 peaks - One on the eastern side, one on north west, one 
on the south west. Each is  100 yojanas tall and  100 yojanas wide these are 
trimurtis worlds. In the center of these is the fourth, which is  400 yojanas tall 
and 400 yojanas wide. 
2.) Sripura is on the Middle peak. Sripura has got metallic compound walls 7 in 
number they are square shaped. Each wall is separated from the next one by 
one a distance of 7 yojanas.1. Kalayasa (iron) wall – The perimeter of this wall 
is 16 thousand yojanas2. Kansya (bronze) wall—Between these two is the first 
chamber. Several trees and gardens are located here. Mahakali and Mahakala 
are the gate keepers here. Kalachakra is their throne. 
3. Tamra (copper) wall - Here is a forest of Kalpavruksha (wish granting tree). 
This is also called as Kalpavatica. This is the second chamber. Vasanta (spring) 
is its protector .Madhusri and Madhavasri are his consorts. 
4. Seesa (lead) wall - Here is a forest of santana trees (progeny granting). This 
is the third chamber Grishma (summer) is the ruler . Shukrasri and Shuchisri 
are his consorts. 

1329 
 



5. Aarkuta (brass) wall - This is the fourth chamber. Here is a forest of Hari 
chandanavruksha (yellow fragrant sandal wood). The ruler is varsharutu (rainy 
season. Nabhasri and Nabhasyasri are his consorts. 6. Panchaloha (five metal) 
wall—In this fifth chamber is a garden of mandara trees(Calotropis 
gigantea).Sharadrutu is the protector. Ishasri and Urjasri are his consorts. 
7. Raupya (silver) wall – Sixth chamber.Parijata tree forest .Hemantarutu is the 
protector. Sahasri and Sahasyasri are his consorts. 
8. Hema (gold) wall - Seventh chamber. Kadamba forest. Sisira (winter) is the 
protector. Tavasri and Tavasyasri are his consorts. This is where Mantrini Devi 
resides in a temple. 
She has one more quarter very close to that of Lalita Devi in Mahapadmatavi( 
forest of lotuses). When she is on duty she stays in that quarter. In this 
seventh chamber near Mantrini‘s residence Matanga kanyas are constantly 
singing and dancing. 
Matanga kanyaka charitra (story of Matanga kanya). In the olden days a sage 
named Matanga used to expand the creation by virtue of the power of his 
penance. His son Matanga was a great saint and practitioner of penance. He 
was the friend of Himavanta. 
Once Himavanta started boasting saying that he was the father of Gauri Devi. 
With that Matanga felt humiliated and started great penance for Mudrini Devi 
(Mudrinidevi is none other than Mantrini Devi who had received a ring from 
Lalita Devi. She is also called Shyamala Devi. 
She was very happy with his penance and gave boon that she herself would be 
born as a daughter to him. A few days later Shyamala Devi appeared in the 
dream of Siddhamati Devi (consort of Matanga). Shyamala Devi gave her a 
flower from the bunch decorating the formers ear. Very soon she had a 
female child who was named Laghushyama as she was born in a very short 
duration (Laghu = short, small). She was also called Matangi, Matanga 
Kanyaka. With her power she generated crores of virgins, who stay near 
Mantrini Devi‘s house and keep singing her praises all the time. 

1330 
 



The Compounds of precious stones: Inside the golden compound, there are 
eleven prakaras (compounds) one inside the other and inside them there are 
six more compounds described hereunder. All these compounds are perfect 
squares. Here also, the distance between one compound and the other is 
Seven yojanas. (yojana is a measurement of length of about nine miles). 
1. Pushyaraga Prakara (The compound of Topaz) The area between the golden 
compound and this one is called Pushyaraga area. Here male and female 
Siddhas reside. Those who were born earlier in the race of Siddha and who 
obtained attainment (Siddhi) in their spiritual practices worshipping the Divine 
Mother, stay here as Siddhas and gladly continue to worship Her. 
2. Padmaraga Prakara (The compound of Ruby) Here celestials of the species 
called Caranas reside. Those who were born in Carana world and worshipped 
the Mother are reborn here, after attaining Her grace. 
3. Gomedhika Prakara (The compound of Agate) In this arena, Kala 
Sankarshani Devi resides. She is worshipped by the Yoginis and Bhairavas. 
4. Vajra Prakara (The compound of diamonds) Apsaras and Gandharvas (divine 
dancers and singers) stay in this arena. They are ever engaged in the Japa 
(repetition) of the Divine Mother‘s names and stay here happily. The river 
Vajranadi flows in this place. The Goddess Vajreswari stays here. When the 
demon Bhanda swallowed the diamond weapon (Vajra Ayudha) of Indra, he 
could get back his weapon by worshipping the Mother here. 
5. Vaidurya Prakara (The compound of Cat‘s eye) Those of the netherworld, 
who attained spiritual achievements by worshipping the Mother, stay in this 
arena. The emperor Bali also resides here.6. Indraneela Prakara (The 
compound of Sapphire) Those people who were born on the earth stay in this 
area enjoying pleasures, after their worship of Lalita during their lifetime 
there. Soon after the effect of their punya (merit) is exhausted, they will be 
born again as human beings on the earth. By the effect of their previous pious 
deeds, they again worship the Mother and return once more to this pious 
place. Due to the blue colour of these precious stones, the dark effect of likes 

1331 
 



and dislikes persists in them. Hence they are born again and again. Those who 
can control their senses to merge in the ultimate state of salvation, i.e., in the 
Divine Mother. They do not have rebirth. 
7. Mukta Prakara (The compound of pearls) Several rivers named Tamraparni, 
Mahaparni, Sadamukta, Sadodaka etc. flow in this area. The celestials who 
worshipped the Mother and chanted her Mantras stay here. The cities of the 
rulers of the eight sides exist here. (The eight sides are East, West, North, 
South, North-East, South-East, NorthWest and South-West). 
8. Marakata Prakara (The compound of Emerald) The abode of the Goddess 
Dandanatha also called Varahi exists in this area. There is a garden of golden 
palm-trees here. The Goddess Unmattabhairavi, Svapnesvari, Tiraskarinidevi, 
Kirapadadevi reside in this area. When Goddess Dandanatha is on duty, she 
stays in a separate palace in the forest of Mahapadma (Big lotuses). 
9. Vidruma Prakara (The compound of Coral) In this area, Brahma along with 
sages like Marica stays and worship the DivineMother. 
10.Manikya Prakara (The compound of Gem) This area is also called the hall of 
gems i.e. Manikya Mantapa. Her Vishnu worships the Mother. 
11. Navaratna Prakara (The compound of nine precious stones) In this area 
exists a huge hall with thousands of pillars. Here Siva along with his attendants 
constantly supervises the activities being done as per the orders of Lalita Devi. 
12. Manomaya Prakara (The compound of mind) The entire area is a big well 
of Amruta (nectar). The Goddess Tara resides here. Along with her attendants, 
she rows a big boat and takes her devotees inside along with Her. 
13. Buddhi Prakara (The compound of the intellect) The entire area is a big 
well of Bliss. The captain of the ship in this arena is the Goddess Varuni. She is 
also called as Sudha malini and Amruteswari. 
14. Ahankara Prakara (The compound of Egoism) The entire area is a big well 
of criticism and nectar; The water of this well is nothing else than the nectar in 
the nerve Sushumna (The central nerve between Ida and Pingala nerves of 
one‘s backbone). The captain of the ship in this area is the Goddess Kurukulla. 

1332 
 



15. Suryabimba Prakara (The compound of the Sun) Here brilliance 
comparable to the light of the rising Sun exists always. Plenty of flowers called 
Kuruvinda are abundant here. The Sun performed penance here and obtained 
brilliance. Martanda Bhairava stays here. He has a very luminous form. His 
three wives are Mahaprakasa Sakti, Cakshusmati Sakti and Chayada Sakti (The 
powers of great brilliance, eyesight and shade). 
16. Candrabimba Prakasa (The compound of the Moon) Moonshine ever exists 
here. The Moon performed penance here and attained illumination. 
Somanatha, the Lord of the stars is the chief deity of this area. 
17. Srungara Prakara (The compound of eroticism) This area is full of waters of 
eroticism. Here Manmatha, (Cupid-the God of love) does Japa of the Mother‘s 
sacred names, rowing in a boat. Only those who are of pure mind by nature 
can cross this area. 18. Cintamani Gruha (The abode of Gems) This is the great 
palace of Sri-chakra. It is called Mahapadmatavi also. Around the mansion, 
hundreds of thousands of lotus like palaces exist. To the east of this place, 
there is a large vessel with a diameter of one Yojana. This is called Arghya 
Patra (the vessel used to wash hands) b) At the south-east corner exists 
Cidagnikunda (The fire pit of knowledge). At the south-west exists Sricakra 
Ratha, the vehicle of Sricakra. At the north-west exists the Geya Cakra Ratha 
of the Goddess Mantrini. At the north-east exists the Kiri Cakra Ratha of the 
Goddess Dandini. 
In between the East and the south-east exists Mantrini gruha - the abode of 
the Goddess Mantrini. In between the East and the north-east exists Dandini 
gruha – the abode of the Goddess Dandini. 
The description of the Palace of Cintamani 1. This palace is centrally located in 
Sripattana – The City of Sri (Wealth). 
2. The walls of the palace are built with Cintamani gems. 
3. The roof also is made of the same stones of Cintamani. 
4. The palace has three towers by names Iccha Sikhara, Kriya Sikhara and 
Jnana Sikhara i.e. the towers of desire, action and knowledge. 

1333 
 



5. The palace has four doors. They are called Amnaya devas. They are Purva, 
Dakshina, Pascima and Uttara – Amnaya devas (on the East, South, West and 
North sides). Amnaya means Veda. 
6. Bindu Peetha (central seat of power) is centrally located in the palace. 
7. This seat of power (peetha) has steps on four sides. 
8. The entire structure described above is of the design of Sricakra. 
9. All the male and female deities of Sricakra reside here. 
10.The Bindu Peetha is called Sri Peetha, Maha Peetha, Vidya Peetha 
andAnanda Peetha also (The seat of prosperity, greatness, knowledge 
andbliss). 
11.On the pedastal exists the cot of the five Brahmas. 
12.The cot has four legs namely Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesana and Iswara. These 
four deities have attained female form by worshipping Mother. 
13.The plank resting on these legs is Sadasiva. 
14.To the east of this cot, there are  36 steps, representing the 36 aspects of 
spiritualism. 
15.There is a foot-rest in front of the cot. 
16.There is swan like bed on the cot. 
17.On the cot, there are two pillows for the head and one pillow for the legs. 
18.A light red blanket is spread on the bed. 
19.The Lord Kameswara sits on the cot facing the East. He is ever in the form 
of a sixteen year old boy. He has four hands and three eyes. He wears erotic 
costumes. 
20.On His lap sits Lalita Devi. She is ever in the form of a sixteen year old girl. 
Her complexion is rosy. She wears erotic costumes. She has four hands. Her 
decoration is the moon. 

1334 
 



21.As she pleases Sadasiva, she is called Lalita (Lalana - to please) Siva 
Kameswarankastha Siva Svadheena Vallabha Sumeru madhya srungastha 
Srimannagara nayika. Cintamani gruhantastha Panca Brahmasana sthita. 
Maha Padmatavi samstha Kadamba vana vasini Sudha sagara madhyastha 
Kamakshi Kamadayini The above names in the Lalita Sahasra nama indicate 
the Srinaara, the Cintamani gruha (the palace of the Mother) and her other 
divine aspects described above. 
The Mother incarnated to kill the demon Bhanda. She is the Supreme Mother 
as per these divine names, will achieve everything auspicious Mokshada 
Ekadasi Yudhishthira Maharaj said, "O Vishnu, master of all, O delight of the 
three worlds, O Lord of the entire Universe, O creator of the world, O oldest 
personality, O best of all beings, I offer my most respectful obeisances unto 
You. 
"O Lord of lords, for the benefit of all living entities, kindly answer some 
questions that I have. What is the name of the Ekadasi that occurs during the 
light fortnight of the month of Margashirsha (November-December) and 
removes all sins? How does one observe it properly, and which Deity is 
worshipped on that holiest of days? O my Lord please explain this to me in 
full." Lord Sri Krishna replied, "O dear Yudhishthira, your enquiry is very 
auspicious in itself and will bring you fame. Just as I previously explained to 
you about the dearest Utpannaa Maha-Dwadasi - which occurs during the 
dark part of the month of Margashirsha, which is the day when Ekadasi-devi 
appeared from My body to kill the demon Mura, and which benefits 
everything animate and inanimate in the three worlds - so I shall now relate to 
you regarding this Ekadasi that occurs during the light part of the month of 
Margashirsha. 
This Ekadasi is famous as Mokshadaa because it purifies the faithful devotee 
of all sinful reactions and bestows liberation upon him. The worshippable 
Deity of this all auspicious day is Lord Damodara. With full attention one 
should worship Him with incense, a ghee lamp, fragrant flowers, and Tulasi 
manjaris (buds). 

1335 
 



"O best of saintly kings, please listen as I narrate to you the ancient and 
auspicious history of this wonderful Ekadasi. Simply by hearing this history one 
can attain the merit earned by performing a horse sacrifice. By the influence 
of this merit, one's forefathers, mothers, sons, and other relatives who have 
gone to hell can turn around and go to the heavenly kingdom. For this reason 
alone, O king, you should listen with rapt attention to this narration. "There 
once was a beautiful city named Champaka-nagar, which was decorated with 
devoted Vaishnavas. There the best of saintly kings Maharaj Vaikhaanasa, 
ruled over his subjects as if they were his very own dear sons and daughters. 
The Brahmins in that capital city were all expert in four kinds of Vedik 
knowledge. The king, while ruling properly, had a dream one night in which his 
father was seen to be suffering the pangs of hellish torture in one of the 
hellish planets ruled over by the Yamaraj. The king was overwhelmed with 
compassion for his father and shed tears. 
The next morning, Maharaj Vaikhaanasa described what he had seen in his 
dream to his council of twice born learned Brahmins. 
" ' O Brahmanas,' the king addressed them, 'in a dream last night I saw my 
father suffering on a hellish planet. He was crying out in anguish, "O son, 
please deliver me from this torment of this hellish condition !" Now I have no 
peace in my mind, and even this beautiful kingdom has become unbearable to 
me. Not even my horses, elephants, and chariots and my vast wealth in my 
treasury that formerly brought so much pleasure, gives me no pleasure at all. 
" 'Everything, O best of the Brahmins, even my own wife and sons, have 
become a source of unhappiness since I beheld my father suffering the 
tortures of that hellish condition so. 
Where can I go, and what can I do, O Brahmins, to alleviate this misery? My 
body is burning with fear and sorrow ! Please tell me what kind of charity, 
what mode of fasting, what austerity, or what deep meditation, and in service 
upon which Deity I may have to perform to deliver my father from that agony 
and bestow upon liberation upon my forefathers. O best among the Brahmins, 
what is the use of one's being a powerful son if one's father must suffer on a 

1336 
 



hellish planet? Truly, such a son's life is utterly useless, to him and to his 
forefathers. 
" The twice born Brahmins replied, 'O king, in the mountainous forest not far 
from here is the ashram where a great saint Parvata Muni resides. Please go 
to him, for he is tri-kalajnan (he knows the past, the present, and the future of 
everything) and can surely help you in your gaining relief from your misery.' 
"Upon hearing this advise, the distressed king immediately set out on a 
journey to the ashram of the famous sage Parvata Muni. The ashram was 
indeed very big and housed many learned sages expert in chanting the sacred 
hymns of the four Vedas (Rg, Yajur, Sama, and Arthava). Approaching the holy 
ashram, the king beheld Parvata Muni seated among the assembly of sages 
adorned with hundreds of tilaks (from all the authorised sampradayas) like 
another Brahmaa or Vyaas. 
"Maharaj Vaikhaanasa offered his humble obeisances to the muni, bowing his 
head and then prostrating his entire body before him. After the king had 
seated himself among the assembly Parvata Muni asked him about the 
welfare of the seven limbs of his extensive kingdom (his ministers, his 
treasury, his military forces, his allies, the Brahmins, the sacrificial offerings 
performed, and the needs of his subjects). The muni also asked him if his 
kingdom was free of troubles and whether everyone was peaceful, happy and 
satisfied. To these enquiries the king replied, 'By your mercy O glorious and 
great sage, all seven limbs of my kingdom are doing very well. Yet there is a 
problem that has recently arisen, and to solve it I have come to you, O 
Brahmana for your expert help and guidance'. 
"Then Parvata Muni, the best of all sages, closed his eyes and meditated on 
the king's past, present and future. After a few moments he opened his eyes 
and said, 'Your father is suffering the results of committing a great sin, and I 
have discovered what it is. In his previous life he quarrelled with his wife and 
forcibly enjoyed her sexually during her menstrual period. She tried to protest 
and resist his advances and even yelled out, "Someone please save me! 
Please, O husband, do not interrupt my monthly period in this way!" Still he 

1337 
 



did not stop or leave her alone. It is on account of this grievous sin that your 
father now has fallen into such a hellish condition of suffering.' "King 
Vaikhaanasa then said, 'O greatest among sages, by what process of fasting or 
charity may I liberate my dear father from such a condition? Please tell me 
how I can relieve and remove the burden of his sinful reactions, which are a 
great obstacle to his progress toward ultimate release (salvation - liberation - 
going back home).' "Parvata Muni replied, 'During the light fortnight of the 
month of Margashirsha there occurs an Ekadasi called Mokshadaa. If you 
observe this sacred Ekadasi strictly, with a full fast, and give directly to your 
suffering father the merit you thus attain/obtain, he will be freed from his 
pain and instantly liberated'. 
"Hearing this, Maharaj Vaikhaanasa profusely thanked the great sage and then 
returned to his palace to perform his vrata (austere rite). O Yudhishthira, 
when the light part of the month of Margashirsha at last arrived, Maharaj 
Vaikhaanasa faithfully waited for the Ekadasi tithi to arrive. He then perfectly 
and with full faith observed the Ekadasi fast with his wife, children, and other 
relatives. He dutifully gave the merit from this fast to his father, and as he 
made the offering, beautiful flower petals showered down from the devas 
who peered out from behind the clouds in the sky. The king's father was then 
praised by the messengers of the demiGods (devas) and escorted to the 
celestial region. 
As he passed his son, as he traversed the lower to middle to higher planets, 
the father said to the king, 'My dear son, all auspiciousness unto you!'At last 
he reached the heavenly realm from where he can again with his newly 
acquired merit perform devotional service to Krishna or Vishnu and in due 
course return back to home back to Godhead. 
"O son of Pandu, who so ever strictly observes the sacred Moksha Ekadasi, 
following the established rules and regulations, achieves full and perfect 
liberation after death. There is no better fasting day than this Ekadasi of the 
light fortnight of the month of Margashirsha, O Yudhishthira, for it is a crystal-
clear and sinless day. Whoever faithfully observes this Ekadasi fast, which is 

1338 
 



like chintaa-mani (a gem that yields all desires), obtains special merit that is 
very hard to calculate, for this day can elevate one from hellish life to the 
heavenly planets, and for one who observes Ekadasi for his own spiritual 
benefit, this elevates one to go back to Godhead, never to return to this 
material world." Thus end the narration of the glories of Margashirsha-shukla 
Ekadasi or Mokshada Ekadasi, from the Brahmanda Purana. 
The Sons of Sagara  
CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO  
The Sacrificial Horse is let loose. Jaimini Said: 1. " After banishing his son, the 
virtuous-souled Lord Sagara transferred his love for him to the child 
Amsumam whose conduct was righteous. 
2. At the very same time, O king, the sons of' Sumati grew up collectively. All 
of them were amiable, devoted and faithful to one another. 
3. They had adamantine bodies. They were cruel, merciless and shameless. 
They were habitually evil in their activities. They had the same nature and 
characteristics. 
4. They cooperated in doing simultaneously the same work. They were 
deluded in their minds. They were easily irritable. They could not be easily 
assailed by any living being. 
They regularly harassed the people. 
5. They had no concern for humility, good conduct or the path of virtue. They 
harassed the entire world around as they pleased, like Asuras. 
6. Attacked and tormented by them, the whole world became distressed and 
unhappy in particular with Yajñas and paths of virtue destroyed. The people 
could not have their regular selfstudy of the Vedas nor could they perform 
holy rites by uttering the Vasatkara mantra. 
7. When everything was being completely destroyed by the sons of Sagara 
who were haughty on account of' the boons they had been granted, the 
Devas, Asuras and the grreat serpents became extremely agitated. 

1339 
 



8. The Earth, overwhelmed by the ocean, began to quake though its name is 
Acala ( immovable ). There was a break and hindrance in the penance and 
abstract iiwditation of the ascetics. 
9. Depraved of the Havya and Kayva offerings, the Devas and the Pitris 
became oppressed by great sorrow. They went to the abode of Brahma. 
10. After going there, the Devas with Sharva* ( probably Shakra ) at their 
head, duly reported to him the entire activities of the sons of Sagara. 
11. On hearing their words, Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, became 
engrossed in thought for a short while. The most excellent one among the 
Suras then said: 12. 0 Devas, listen, attentively to my words. Welfare unto 
you. There is no doubt that the sons of Sagara will be destroyed ere long. 
13. Wait for a short time. Everything is being controlled by time. Everything 
else is but an instrumental. That time alone is the master of all. 
14. Hence, O excellent Suras, what I am going to say for your welfare should 
now be carried out by all of you without any slackness. 
15. The holy Lord Kapila, the most excellent among victorious ones, the roost 
exalted among the leading Yogins, is born on the earth with a partial power of 
Visnu, for the welfare of the universe. 
16. He is now sitting, meditating in a lonely place somewhere in the ocean, 
the water of which had been sucked up by Agastya. This meditation has been 
going on for the last hundred years according to the reckoning of heaven 
dwellers. 
17. At my behest, all of you go to the leading sage Kapila. Stand near him 
wishing for the conclusion of his meditation. 
18. At the close of his abstract meditation, you will bow down to him and tell 
him your purpose in full. He will do what is conducive to your welfare. 
19. O excellent Devas, do something whereby a break in the abstract 
meditation of the sage can be caused through the sons of Sagara". Jaimini 
said: 20. On being told thus by him, the Devas bowed down to Brahma and 

1340 
 



went to Kapila, the most excellent among the Brahmanas; with palms joined 
in reverence, they spoke to him. 
The Devas said: 21. Be pleased with us, oh excellent sage. We have sought 
refuge in you. The whole of the universe, harassed by the sons of Sagara, is 
peRishing. 
22. It is well known that you are the cause of the sustenance and annihilation 
of the worlds. With the partial power of Vishnu, you have incarnated on the 
earth and you stay here as the leading Yogin. 
23. A physical body has been voluntarily assumed by you, only for the 
destruction of the great distress of men afflicted by the three types of agony. 
Indeed, you are the most excellent among those who perform austerities. 
24. Undoubtedly, O Brahmana, you are capable, at your will, to mentally, 
create the entire universe, sustain it and annihilate it. 
25. You are our creator and dispenser of our destiny. You are our preceptor. 
You are our greatest resort. You are our protector. Put an end to our 
adversity. 
26. O leading Brahmana, be the resort and refuge of the leading Brahmanas in 
particular, who reside in the three worlds and who are being persecuted by 
the sons of Sagara. 
27. Indeed, the activities of people like you will be of Satva ( very good ) 
nature. Hence, O sage of good holy rites, it behooves you to save us and all 
the world. 
28-31a. If not, O holy saint, the entire universe will be destroyed 
prematurely." Jaimini Said: " On being told thus by all the Devas, Kapila slowly 
opened his eyes. Glancing at there, he spoke these pleasing words ' Utterly 
burned by their own actions, the sons of Sagara will surely perish when the 
proper time arrives. Let that time be awaited by you all. 
For the achievement of your purpose, O excellent Suras, I shall become the 
cause of destruction of those evilminded ones.' 31- 33. Ere long, the sons of 

1341 
 



Sagara, whose minds are inclined towards sinful activities and whose intellects 
have been adversely affected by Kala ( Time, God of Death ) will be burned by 
the fire of my anger. Hence, 0 Devas, all the worlds shall be rid of distress. 
They will have fear from nowhere. Let them ( sons of Sagara ) be wicked in 
their actions. 
They will quickly meet with their annihilation. So be free from fear and go 
back to your own city. Wait for some time. Thereafter, you will realise what 
you desire." 34-38. On being told thus by Kapila, all those Devas including 
Indra, became delighted. 
After bowing down to him they went towards heaven. In the meantime, king 
Sagara, the Lord of the Earth desired to perform Vajimedha (HorseSacrifice), 
the great Yajna. With the permission of Vasistha, he gathered together all the 
necessary requisites. 
Accompanied by Aurva and other Brahmanas he duly took the initiation for 
the performance of sacrifice. For the purpose of letting the horse roam about, 
the king of great renown called all his sons and commanded them thus: O my 
sons, make the horse roam about all round the earth. It behoves you to do 
this immediately and bring it back to me." Jaimini said: 39-43. " At the behest 
of their father they took the horse and made it wander over the entire earth. 
It was only because of the directive of the Vedic injunction that the horse was 
made to go round the earth and not for the conquest of the quarters nor for 
levying taxes and tributes as the whole of the earth had already been 
conquered by that king. Kings had already been made payers of tributes by 
that king of exalted heroism in the battlefield. Then those princes reached the 
lower ground surface of the salt ocean wherein there was no water. With 
great delight they encircled the horse and entered the interior of the earth. 
 
CHAPTER FIIFTY-THREE  

1342 
 



The Destruction of the Sons of Sagara Jamini Said: 1. When they reached 
there, the wind God who had been directed by Indra, carried away the horse 
to the netherworlds within a moment. 
2. Stealing the horse without being seen by any of them, O king, the wind God 
carried it away along that path to the vicinity of sage Kapila. 
3-4. When the horse disappeared, all those princes became perplexed. 
Searching for the horse, they went 'round and 'round the earth. After 
searching the entire earth including the cities, mountains and forests, they 
attained great sorrow because they were still unable to see the sacrificial 
animal. 
5. Then they went back to Ayodhya, surrounded by the sagas, met their 
father, bowed down to him and initiated to him everything. 
6. " The moment we entered the ocean after wandering over the whole of the 
earth, the horse was taken away by some one though it was being vigilantly 
guarded by us who were on the watch." 7-8. On being told thus by them the 
excellent king became infuriated and told them " Go away hence, unrighteous 
ones, never to return again. How was it lost by you, while you were alive. You 
were indeed evil minded ones. There is no question of your returning without 
the horse here". 
9. Then all of them together setout from that place and said to one another: " 
Even now the horse is not to be seen, what shall we do?" 10. The whole of the 
earth was searched by us, including the mountains, forests and parks. The 
horse is not seen anywhere nor its news is heard. 
11. Hence, starting with the ocean and extending as far as the netherworlds, 
we shall split the earth and dig it. We shall enter the netherworlds and search 
for the horse.12. Having decided thus, all those sons of Sagara, of cruel 
resolve, dug the earth everywhere beginning with the seashore. 
13. Being dug by them, the earth became greatly excited and cried aloud. On 
seeing their activity, all living beings cried in distress. 

1343 
 



14. After digging the Bharata subcontinent and casting it off on the ground, 
they united a thousand Yojanas of the earth to the ocean. 
15. Digging the earth upto the netherworlds, the sons of the king saw the 
horse grazing in the netherworlds. 
I6. Delighted very much they gathered together and laughed out of 
contentment. Some of them danced with great joy. 
17-21. They saw the noble-souled Kapila of brilliant lustre who was very old; 
who was seated in the lotusposture, with his eyes fixed yet at the tip of his 
nose, who had kept the head and neck straight and long; who had kept the 
chest projecting forward, who was shining with his own splendour radiating all 
round in full like a lamp placed in a windless spot; whose body was full of 
perfect knowledge shining within himself; whose mind was engaged in 
abstract meditation; who appeared like the motionless ocean; who was duly 
engaged in the yogic exercise; whose mind was engrossed in what should be 
meditated upon; who was the most excellent among leading Yogins and who 
looked like the fire with its clusters of flames extinguished. On seeing him 
staying there, they consulted one another about him for a short while. For a 
short while, they underwent excessive agitation. 
22-23. Thinking that it was he who stole the horse, the evil-minded sons of' 
Sagara, induced by the God of death, surrounded Kapila, the excellent sage. 
Encircling him they said, " This is the thief: There is no doubt about it. This evil-
minded robber of the horse deserves to be killed by us". 
Jaimini said : 24-27a. " All those Sagaras whose intellect had become deluded 
and whose death was imminent, suddenly molested the sage who was sitting 
like an ordinary person. 
Then sage Kapila who had never been dejected in mind, was overwhelmed 
with wrath, because he had been upset due to the break in his abstract 
meditation. He was agitated. Assailed by those evilminded ones, the 
unassailable sage Kapila became agitated. He assumed a huge size like the fire 
that increases in size at the end of the Kalpa on account of the gusts of wind. 

1344 
 



27b-30a. The fire of anger arising out of his body as vast and majestic as the 
ocean, burst forth like the Samkarshana fire issuing from the poison of Sesha 
out to burn down the netherworlds. His anger was further kindled by the 
recollection of attack. The sage who had a lustre similar to that of a wheel of 
fire ( i.e. whirling fire ) opened his eyes. Then for a moment, O king, his eyes 
became extremely red and shone like the Sun and the Moon simultaneously 
appearing in the sky at dawn. 
30b-35. He looked at the princes with rolling eyes gravely, like the God of 
annihilation at the close of ( Kalpa ) period. Sparks and flames of fire suddenly 
emerged from the eyes of that infuriated sage and spread all round in various 
directions continuously, like the sparks of Kalagni ( destructive fire at the time 
of final annihilation ). The sparks of fire of the Sage's anger pervaded the 
quarters all round, with columns of smoke projecting forward and emitting 
floods of sparks frequently. 
The sparks emanating from his eyes like the poisonous flames with the cavity 
of the belly of a python, shone like the flames of the Vadavafire ( submarine 
fire ) of the violent ocean.The fire of anger, O great king, that pervaded the 
spaces in the quarters by means of its flames, enveloped the firmament and 
burned the sons of Sagara. 
36. The world became enveloped by the clusters of flames of fire and smoke 
whirling round and round on account of the angry ( i.e. violent ) blasts of wind 
that blew with a loud report. It became filled with the dusts of the earth too, 
that were blown up excessively. Hence, the world became too much afflicted. 
37. All round, the fire appeared to be scraping the firmament by means of its 
flames struck by the velocity of wind. It immediately burned down completely 
the sons of the king who were the enemies of the Suras. 
38. Even as all the worlds were watching, the fire of Kapila's anger reduced 
the Sagaras to ashes completely, sparing only the horse. 

1345 
 



39. Thus the sons of Sagara, of sinful mind, were burned suddenly on account 
of that fire of anger like the dry trees that get consumed in the forest 
conflagration. 
40. On seeing the annihilation of those evil-minded Sagaras, the Devas spoke 
to one another in wonder, along with the Sages. 
41-42. Oh, the ultimate bad result of those persons who have committed 
terrible sins has not been delayed. Indeed, in this world, men of wicked souls 
have to meet with a bad end. These wicked and cruel minded persons, huge in 
size like mountains, have suddenly and forcibly perished like dry grass in fire. 
43. They had caused anxiety and torture to all living beings. They were 
extremely censured by good men throughout their lives. Fortunately, they 
have met with their destruction. 
44. Which man can attain happiness in this world after committing an 
inauspicious action that is censured by the worlds and that causes harassment 
to others? 45. These sinners had made all living beings cry aloud. They have 
now been struck dead by means of Brahmadanda ( the punishing rod of a 
Brahmana ). Hence, on account of their own evil actions, they have gone to 
hell where they will be spending many many years. 
46. Hence, only good actions should be performed by intelligent persons. The 
other type of actions censured by the world should be cast off far away ( i.e. 
completely avoided ). 
47. As long as one is alive, one should strive for the attainment of final 
beatitude. This should be done by one who knows what is good for him. One 
should not harm or injure any one, as life is transitory. 
48. This body is nonpermanent. Riches are extremely fickle. The entire worldly 
existence is utterly worthless. How may the learned one believe ( otherwise 
)?" 49. Even as the leading Suras and sages were telling one another thus, the 
sons of Sagara perished after becoming the fuel to the fire of the anger of the 
sage. 

1346 
 



50. The sons of Sagara whose bodies were burnt down suddenly, ( as if ) 
paralysed the earth with their ashes and instantaneously fell into hell due to 
their sinful deeds. 
51. After burning those sons of Sagara entirely, the fire arising from his anger 
was on the point of burning all the worlds suddenly in a moment. 
52. The Devas who became frightened gathered together and stood by in the 
firmament. Being desirous of suppressing the fire of anger, they eulogised the 
noble-souled sage."  
CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR  
Recovery of the Sacrificial Horse: Jaimini said:" It behoves you, O Leading 
Brahmana, to restrain immediately this Fire of anger. If not, the entire 
universe is likely to be burnt by it untimely. Your greatness has been seen. The 
whole world including the mobile and the immobile beings has been pervaded 
by this fire of your anger. Forbear, please restrain this anger, O leading 
Brahmana. Obeisance to you." On being eulogised thus, the saintly Kapila, 
immediately controlled the extremely terrible fire of anger. Thereupon, the 
entire universe including the mobile and the immobile beings became calm. 
Devas and the ascetics became free from distress. 
In the meantime, the saintly Rishi Narada, O King, casually went to Ayodhya 
from the Devaloka ( the world of the Devas ). 
On seeing that Narada had arrived, Sagara worshipped him perfectly in 
accordance with the injunctions of the scriptures, with Arghya, Padya and 
other materials of worship. Accepting that honour and worship, Narada sat on 
the exalted seat and spoke these words, O King, to Sagara the tiger among 
kings. 
Narada said: " Your sons who had gone to take horse around the, world, O 
excellent king, have been struck down by the curse of a Brahmana. All of them 
have perished. Your sacrificial horse, O King, that was being guarded by all of 
them was taken somewhere in the heaven without being noticed by anyone, 
as ordained by fate. They began to search for the lost horse all over the earth. 

1347 
 



For a long time, O king, they did not get any information of its whereabouts. 
Thereupon, they decided to search for the horse underneath the earth. 
Beginning earnestly, those Sagaras dug up the surface of the earth. 
While digging the earth, O King, they saw the horse in Patala ( Netherworlds ) 
and near it they saw the great sage Kapila, the leading Yogin. On seeing him, 
they committed a sinful deed. All of then being urged by Kala (God of death), 
saying "This is the robber of the horse", they made Kapila sufficiently 
infuriated. 
Thereupon, your sons perished with their bodies as fuel to the fire emanating 
from his eyes and caused by his anger, the fire that burned the quarters. 
You need not grieve over them. It does not behoove you to grieve over them, 
O leading King, because they were cruel, of sinful conduct and were creating 
troubles and impediments to all people. Retain your courage as your asset. 
 

1348